Title: GPU acceleration of plane-wave density functional theory calculations in Abinit

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11139v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:53:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
## GPU acceleration of plane-wave density functional theory calculations in Abinit 

Ioanna-Maria Lygatsika, 1, 2, ∗ Marc Sarraute, 3 Lucas Baguet, 1, 2 Pierre Kestener, 1, 4 and Marc Torrent 1, 2 

> 1

CEA DAM-DIF, F-91297 Arpajon, France 

> 2

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, LMCE, F-91680 Bruyères-le-Châtel, France 

> 3

Alliance Service Plus, 62 rue Emile Zola, F-91200 Boulogne-Billancourt, France 

> 4

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, LiHPC, F-91680 Bruyères-le-Châtel, France 

We report on the GPU porting of the Abinit high-performance simulation code for plane-wave DFT cal-culations. Large-scale electronic structure calculations require computing the electronic wave function by solving the Kohn-Sham problem discretized over a large number of plane-wave basis functions. Porting such calculations over hundreds of GPU nodes relies not only on extensive usage of vendor libraries from a develop-ment perspective, but also on algorithmic revisions of the iterative diagonalization procedure in the resolution of the Kohn-Sham problem to identify GPU-efficient mathematical operations (linear algebra, FFTs) applied to wave functions distributed in memory. The present contribution discusses the Abinit implementation on multi-GPU architectures, providing detailed performance results to compare CPU nodes versus heterogeneous CPU–GPU nodes. Particular attention is given in the comparison of two different diagonalization algorithms, that is Locally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient and Chebyshev polynomial filtering, in terms of their GPU efficiency. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Large-scale simulations in materials science at the quan-tum level involve the computation of thousands of electronic states. This raises a challenge when it comes to efficiently exploiting the latest High-Performance Computing (HPC) ar-chitectures for reducing the simulation time, mainly due to the large problem size in terms of the number of states. Over the past decade, graphics processing units (GPU) have be-come widely available as accelerators in modern HPC sys-tems. The advent of accelerators comes on top of an exist-ing parallel programming landscape relying on multi-core architectures. The progressive evolution of hardware has lead HPC simulation code developers to adopt new hybrid programming models for heterogeneous architectures. As GPU vendor libraries have become increasingly available, the porting task is facilitated to a great extent. Electronic struc-ture calculations using ab initio methods, namely Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory (DFT) [1, 2], are a great candi-date for GPU architectures due to the computationally expen-sive linear algebra operations required to calculate electronic wave functions, specifically diagonalizing large Hamiltonian matrices, which GPUs accelerate efficiently. In recent years, several ab initio codes in material science have been ported to GPU: we cite Quantum ESPRESSO [3], 

Vasp using plane-wave basis sets [4–6], BigDft using wavelet basis sets [7], Gpaw using real space discretiza-tion [8], as well as finite element codes [9, 10] among oth-ers [11]. This paper concerns the widely used Abinit open-source simulation software, an international collaborative project for material science based on ab initio methods us-ing plane-wave basis [12]. For several years, Abinit has uti-lized supercomputer architectures [13] and regularly adapts       

> ∗Corresponding author, Present address: COMMEDIA, Laboratoire Jacques–Louis Lions, Sorbonne Université and Inria Paris, 2 rue Simone Iff, 75012 Paris, France. Email: ioanna-maria.lygatsika@inria.fr

to modern programming standards: massively parallel pro-gramming (MPI), computing on multi-core architectures (hy-brid MPI–OpenMP), and lately CPU–GPU hybridization. The present paper aims at presenting the state-of-the-art of the GPU port of Abinit towards this modernization effort. GPU porting of Abinit dates back to 2009, with the first use of accelerators introduced through the “recursion method”, which allows the computation of the density (and the energy) without computing any orbital. This method is only efficient at very high temperatures and is not usable for standard calculations. In 2010, plans were made to use GPUs in the ground-state calculations of Abinit , accompa-nied by a code analysis to identify parts that could be ported to the GPU. In 2011, the first GPU version of Abinit (v6.12) was implemented. By 2012, portability improvements were made: automatic tests were created, and the code was tested and successfully ported to NVIDIA Fermi accelerators. This early GPU port was based on custom CUDA kernels, with batched FFTs (wave function not batched yet) and iterative diagonalization algorithms using MAGMA library [14] for NVIDIA only. This way of using CUDA to port Abinit to GPU was discontinued. Another earlier NVIDIA GPU im-plementation employed the Kokkos performance portability library [15] with the CUDA backend. The current GPU ver-sion of Abinit , re-implemented over the past two years from scratch, uses the MPI + OpenMP GPU offloading program-ming model and new low-level libraries provided by GPU vendors for executing mathematical operations [16]. We summarize our contributions as follows: 

• Overview of porting strategy. We present porting con-cepts focusing on specific parts of the code successfully ported to GPU: matrix-matrix multiplications, FFTs, linear algebra operations. 

• GPU-resident wave function calculations. The wave function is updated regularly and maintained in GPU memory. We explain how we optimized memory us-age and exploited batch processing for this calcula-tion. We provide MPI communication theoretical esti-

> arXiv:2604.11139v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 13 Apr 2026

2mates for two iterative diagonalization algorithms: Lo-cally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradi-ent (LOBPCG) and Chebyshev polynomial filtering. 

• GPU performance metrics. We introduce metrics that allow to examine wave function calculation steps un-der the prism of arithmetic intensity and GPU mem-ory bandwidth. We report an in-depth comparison of diagonalization algorithms in terms of execution time and energy consumption on GPUs, for assessing per-formance portability and comparing energy efficiency between vendors.  

> II. PORTING FRAMEWORK

This section presents the key considerations and compu-tational design patterns at the core of Abinit ’s GPU port-ing, irrespective of the programming model. We highlight the computational structure underlying wave function calcu-lations and identify the shared characteristics of numerically intensive workloads that enabled efficient GPU porting, mak-ing our application well suited for GPU architectures. Addi-tionally, we describe data movement concepts employed in GPU memory. Firstly, Section II A focuses on batch processing as key computational principle in Abinit . GPU storage of the wave function is detailed in Section III. Section II B describes host-device data transfers. Lastly, Section II D outlines the prob-lem sizes dimensioning compute-bound , memory-bound and 

communication-bound operations and kernels, such as large matrix operations.  

> A. Batch processing

Batch processing programming approach is crucial for the GPU port, as it determines how routines and kernels execute when computing the primary object of interest—the elec-tronic wave function Ψ. To approximate Ψ, numerical solvers make use of batch processing at the level of electronic bands and of plane waves, i.e., rows and columns of Ψ respectively. In essence, batch processing consists of regrouping data to operate on larger chunks instead of many smaller ones. Re-grouping the data exposes coarser-grained data parallelism, so as to provide a workload better suited to exploiting the computational power of GPUs. A requirement is that the task applied to each batch must be independent for all data and able to run asynchronously, typically in the sense of the SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) programming model. The most representative example of task on batched data is the application of the plane-wave Hamiltonian operator, that can be executed on multiple electronic bands at once instead of per band in a loop. The use of batch processing is crucial for avoiding device memory (DRAM) overhead and increasing throughput when calling a GPU kernel. The Abinit code already implements batch processing on CPU, for vectorized architectures inside a single CPU core, since the 2014 version. This optimization consisted in re-grouping data into batches, that allowed for instance to re-place level-2 BLAS operations by level-3 ones and apply FFTs to multiple vectors of plane-wave coefficients at once. The wave function is thus globally treated by blocks on CPU and the GPU port was greatly facilitated by this existing fea-ture, especially adapted to massively parallel architectures. Indeed, the block treatment of the wave function shows its perks in the case of the application of the plane-wave Hamil-tonian operator, where one of the main GPU kernels under-lying this mathematical operation is FFT. The main idea is to execute many independent FFTs asynchronously instead of relying on parallel FFT implementations. To do this, we treat the matrix Ψ as a batch of column vectors and apply FFT to each column independently by a single kernel call. Porting this operation on GPU follows the batched execution illus-trated in Algorithm 2, compared to a less efficient band-wise execution shown in Algorithm 1.                

> 1: for Ψi∈Ψ1, . . . , ΨMdo
> 2: Ψi←ApplyLocalPotential (Ψ i)fftw_plan_dft_1d (CPU )
> →xfftPlan1d (GPU )
> 3: end for

Algorithm 1: Per-band execution.          

> 1: Ψ←ApplyLocalPotential (Ψ) fftw_plan_many_dft (CPU )
> →xfftPlanMany (GPU )

Algorithm 2: Batched bands execution. FIG. 1: GPU ports of the main routines from the FFTW library [17] on CPU, for computing the application of the local part of Hamiltonian operator over M electronic bands, followed by GPU kernels from the xFFT library, for x =“cu” [18] (CUDA API on NVIDIA GPUs) or “hip” [19] (HIP API on AMD GPUs). While level-3 BLAS and batched 1D FFTs for treating elec-tronic bands are optimizations also found in the CPU im-plementation, we mention the following new batching de-sign particularly well suited to GPU-resident algorithms. The GPU port of Abinit goes a step further by making use of many batched kernel calls on smaller matrices [20]. This new design is adapted to highly parallel workloads as data is stored in a configurable stride in memory, where the stride is the distance between two consecutive electronic bands. An example of mathematical operation enabling this strided batch processing is batched matrix-matrix multipli-cation when applied to a group of small matrices indepen-dently. The latter is a new operation only present on the GPU port and for this reason it is discussed in more detail in Section IV B.  

> B. Host-device memory transfers

The heaviest data move between host and device happens at the wave-function level. As a consequence, it is critical to offload most wave-function-based computations to the GPU 3while minimizing host-device data transfers. In order to port the wave function calculation to GPU, the wave function must first be transferred to GPU. The main strategy consists in performing a single transfer of the wave function from CPU to GPU at the start of every self-consistent field (SCF) iteration, then avoid any intermediate transfers and keep the wave function entirely on GPU memory to perform the di-agonalization of a constant Hamiltonian operator, as seen in step 4 of Algorithm 3, before updating the electronic density. An additional host-device memory transfer is performed before proceeding to the next self-consistent iteration for the needs of computing the electronic density function from con-verged wave function coefficients (see step 8 of Algorithm 3). This transfer is necessary to organize the wave function in a suitable memory layout, done on the CPU, before execut-ing symmetrization operations on Fourier space on the GPU. Computing the density involves a FFT operation on the con-verged wave function coefficients. The so-called waveform 

layout enables per-band (per-spinor) FFT operations, requir-ing all plane-wave coefficients for each band to be contiguous in memory. This necessitates copying the converged wave function with index remapping: the iterative diagonalization algorithm uses column-major order by bands while the wave-form layout requires column-major order by plane waves.                                    

> 1: Initialize Ψ.(on CPU)
> 2: while self-consistent field iteration do
> 3: Copy Ψfrom CPU to GPU. (H2D)
> 4: Solve HΨ = Λ SΨ.(solver on GPU)
> 5: Copy Ψfrom GPU to CPU. (D2H)
> 6: Symmetrize Ψin column-major memory layout Ψc.
> 7: Copy Ψcfrom CPU to GPU. (H2D)
> 8: Compute electronic density from Ψc.(FFT on GPU)
> 9: if convergence met then exit
> 10: end while
> 11: return Ψ

Algorithm 3: Self-consistent field in DFT. FIG. 2: Host-device memory transfers in main wave-function computation for GPU-resident diagonalization (step 4) performed iteratively within SCF outer loop. H is the plane-wave Hamiltonian at current SCF iteration and S the PAW overlap matrix [21].  

> C. Communication between GPUs

In the GPU port of Abinit , all MPI data transfers are im-plemented using a GPU-aware MPI implementation, i.e. al-lowing hardware-specific optimizations, and support GPU pointers. To every k-point, we associate a set of parallel processes. No communication is needed between k-points, their treatment is almost embarrassingly parallel. The MPI distribution of the wave function for a given k-point is im-plemented in a 2D processor grid as follows. The matrix of column vectors–each representing the coefficients of a band in the plane-wave basis and thus the corresponding wave function–is uniformly distributed across a user-defined num-ber p of MPI processes. In Abinit , each MPI task is associated with a GPU (note that several MPI tasks can share the same GPU). Two types of wave-function distributions are required, depending on the computation: 

• Row-distributed, suited to operations involving all columns or electronic bands, such as linear algebra solvers, and 

• Column-distributed, referred to as the waveform layout suited to the application of the Hamiltonian and FFTs since each process holds the full set of plane waves. Switching between wave-function MPI distributions is ex-ecuted by performing an all-to-all collective communication. The default distribution is by rows. Figure 3 illustrates the MPI transposition operation. Notice that host-device mem-ory transfers are executed only before and after all-to-all communications, thus the two can be entirely decoupled when GPU-aware MPI is enabled.  

> D. Limiting dimensions

Limiting dimensions are responsible for bottlenecks and condition scaling. These dimensions, along with mathemati-cal operations most highly affected, are: 

• number of electronic bands: linear algebra operations, 

• number of plane waves: FFTs, matrix-matrix multipli-cations. Note that k-point parallelism is embarrassingly parallel and is therefore not a limiting dimension. Fortunately, the mathematical operations constrained by other limiting di-mensions are inherently GPU-friendly, suggesting strong portability potential for our code.  

> III. ITERATIVE ALGORITHMS

Iterative diagonalization is key in plane-wave DFT to com-pute electronic wave functions using so-called matrix-free 

algorithms. The solvers for this step are the most time-consuming part of plane-wave based electronic structure cal-culations. In this section, we present the parallel design of available solvers in Abinit and provide theoretical estimates to model their cost, in terms of computation in FLOPS (float-ing point operations per second), MPI communications (mes-sage count and communication volume) and arithmetic in-tensity. We then use these theoretical estimates to predict GPU acceleration of our solvers from an algorithmic perspec-tive.  

> A. Problem setup

The Kohn-Sham equations for electronic wave functions 

ψn read Hψ n = λnSψ n, where H is the Hamiltonian op-erator and S the overlap operator for the ψn. S = I only 4Ψ11 

Ψ21 

Ψ31 

Ψ41 

> Nbands
> H2D
> 1
> Eigensolver
> 9
> 10
> D2H
> Row distribution

Ψ11 Ψ12 Ψ13 Ψ14 

Ψ21 Ψ22 Ψ23 Ψ24 

Ψ31 Ψ32 Ψ33 Ψ34 

Ψ41 Ψ42 Ψ43 Ψ44 

> + Index remapping
> + Split into chunks
> 2
> 8
> GPU-aware All-to-All
> (Row-to-Col)
> GPU-aware All-to-All
> (Col-to-Row)
> 3
> 7

Ψ11 Ψ12 Ψ13 Ψ14 

Ψ21 Ψ22 Ψ23 Ψ24 

Ψ31 Ψ32 Ψ33 Ψ34 

Ψ41 Ψ42 Ψ43 Ψ44 

> + Index remapping
> 4
> + Split into chunks
> 6

Ψ11 Ψ12 Ψ13 Ψ14 Npw 

> Column distribution
> FFT 5

FIG. 3: Row-to-column and column-to-row MPI transpositions of the wave function Ψ distributed across p = 4 processes. Data transfer between host and device is illustrated in steps 1 and 10. Mathematical operations (FFTs, eigensolver) are executed per block (red dashed border) in parallel. In practice, we perform all-to-all-v communication to distribute plane-wave indices as uniformly as possible during row splitting. with norm-conserving pseudopotentials; S̸ = I whenever the norm constraint is relaxed, as in Projector Augmented-Wave (PAW) approach [21]. H and S are Npw × Npw Her-mitian matrices and Ψ = ( ψn)1≤n≤Nbands is a Npw × Nbands 

matrix of wave functions expressed in plane wave basis. We assume in this section that the electronic density is fixed and we are within a fixed SCF iteration, that is, in step 4 of Algo-rithm 3. We look for the first smallest Nbands ≪ Npw eigen-pairs of H. The iterations used within the diagonalization will be referred to as inner iterations to distinguish from SCF 

outer iterations, not discussed here. 

B. Main computational kernels 

We describe here the core components of available iter-ative solvers in Abinit from a mathematical point of view, independently of their implementation. 

a. Eigensolvers. All iterative diagonalization algorithms for the Hamiltonian follow a two-step process: (i) Subspace iteration: Build a subspace by iterating on trial vector blocks, e.g., via Krylov methods, conjugate gradient (CG) residual minimization, or spectral filter-ing. (ii) Eigenvector extraction: Diagonalize the Hamiltonian inside the subspace spanned by trial vectors to extract an approximate eigenspace using the Rayleigh–Ritz 

(RR) procedure. The first step iteratively refines a set of trial vectors to ap-proximate an invariant subspace, while the second step is a direct solver that yields the directions inside the invariant subspace that best approximate the actual eigenbasis. The Rayleigh-Ritz procedure is illustrated in Figure 4. It con-sists of first projecting the Hamiltonian to the trial subspace, then solving a smaller generalized eigenproblem on the sub-space, finally rotating the obtained solution to recover ap-proximated eigenvectors. 

b. Matrix-free application of the Hamiltonian. In plane-wave basis, applying the Hamiltonian operator to an arbi-trary coefficient vector involves FFTs and local multiplica-tions. Abinit implements a matrix-free application of the plane-wave Hamiltonian. Matrix-free algorithms save mem-ory by applying the Hamiltonian to a wave function (or any input column vector) without explicit allocation of any mem-ory for storing the Hamiltonian matrix. Matrix-free algo-rithms are well-suited to plane-wave DFT because the num-ber of target eigenpairs ( ∼10k–30k) is much smaller than the number of plane-wave basis elements ( ∼100k–1M). More-over, the plane-wave Hamiltonian is dense, so explicit storage would scale quadratically with the number of plane waves. Matrix-free methods reduce memory requirements to linear scaling in the number of plane waves. 

c. Subspace iteration. Abinit implements two main classes of algorithms for constructing the trial subspace, us-ing two different approaches. The first one is vector-oriented 

and partitions the wave function into blocks of vectors to ap-ply a block resolution, such as the Locally-Optimal Block Pre-conditioned Conjugate Gradient (LOBPCG) [22], while the second one is spectrum-oriented and filters the eigenvalue spectrum using analytical properties of polynomials to am-plify wanted spectral intervals, such as Chebyshev filtering [23] (using Chebyshev polynomials). All steps of these two families of algorithms are offloaded to GPUs allowing to keep the wave function in GPU-resident memory. Figure 5 illus-trates the block structure used by the two classes of algo-rithms when applying elementary operations on the wave function. Note that polynomial filtering eliminates inter-block dependencies, contrary to vector-oriented LOBPCG                        

> Input: Matrices Hand S, trial vectors Ψ.
> Output: Solution (Λ ,Ψ) of HΨ = Λ SΨ.
> 1: HΨ= Ψ ⊤HΨgemm
> 2: SΨ= Ψ ⊤SΨgemm
> 3: HΨX= Λ SΨXhegvd
> 4: Ψ←X⊤Ψgemm

FIG. 4: Rayleigh-Ritz (RR) procedure and the names of corresponding LAPACK routines (right). 5that includes inter-block dependence when orthogonaliza-tion with respect to previous blocks. Finally, a global solver call based on the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure is common in both methods.                   

> for n= 0 , . . . , k do for Ψi∈Ψ1, . . . , Ψbdo
> Ψi←RefineSubspaceBlock (Ψ 1, . . . , Ψi)(H app.+ortho+CG)
> Ψi←ExtractEigenvectorsBlock (Ψ i)(block solver=RR)
> end for end for
> Ψ←ExtractEigenvectors (Ψ) (global solver=RR)

Algorithm 4: LOBPCG with b blocks and k line minimizations.          

> for n= 0 , . . . , k do
> Ψ←SpectralFiltering (Ψ) (H app.)
> end for
> Ψ←ExtractEigenvectors (Ψ) (global solver=RR)

Algorithm 5: Spectral polynomial filtering of degree k.FIG. 5: Schematic description of GPU-ported eigensolvers used to solve HΨ = Λ SΨ. Note that elementary core components – Hamiltonian application (H app.), congugate gradient (CG), Rayleight-Ritz (RR) – are common to both types of algorithms, but applied to different subspaces. 

C. Parallel implementation design 

We focus on the parallel implementation of iterative solvers based on the main computational kernels. These op-erations and their respective notation are: 

• S-orthogonalization of m bands expressed in n

plane-wave coefficients, performed by the routine 

Sortho (n × m),

• Rayleigh-Ritz procedure to extract m eigenvectors ex-pressed in n plane-wave coefficients, performed by the routine RR (n × m),

• Application of the Hamiltonian operator H (and of the PAW overlap matrix S) to m vectors expressed in 

n plane-wave coefficients, performed by the routine 

H(n × m) (and by HS (n × m)), 

• Application of the inverse overlap operator S to m

vectors expressed in n plane-wave coefficients, using a Woodburry formulation, as explained in [23], per-formed by the routine Sinv (n × m).The Chebyshev polynomial spectrum filtering algorithm employs an auxiliary kernel to efficiently compute the Hamil-tonian polynomial applied to wave functions via a recur-rence relation. It involves operations of the form X ←

aX +Y , for X and Y of size n×m, performed by the routine 

axpy (n × m). We synchronize all parallel processes every n

sequential iterations. This is showed in Figure 6. Note that the loop over the number of blocks as well as the loop over the number of inner iterations are intrinsically sequential.                                        

> for n= 0 , . . . , k do for Ψi∈Ψ1, . . . , Ψbdo if b > 1then
> Ψi←Sortho (np×mb)
> end if MPI transpose Row-to-Column.
> HΨi, S Ψi←HS (N×mbp)
> MPI transpose Column-to-Row.
> Ψi←Sortho (np×mb)Ψi←RR (np×mb)
> end for end for
> Ψ←Sortho (np×M)Ψ←RR (np×M)

Algorithm 6: LOBPCG.                               

> MPI transpose Row-to-Column.
> HΨ, S Ψ←HS (N×mp)
> for n= 0 , . . . , k do
> HΨ←H(N×mp)
> S−1HΨ←Sinv (N×mp)Ψ←axpy (N×mp)
> end for
> HΨ, S Ψ←HS (N×mp)
> MPI transpose Column-to-Row.
> Ψ←RR (np×M)

Algorithm 7: Chebyshev filtering of degree k.FIG. 6: Parallel subspace iteration algorithms for computing the wave function Ψ described at the level of GPU kernels. 

N := Npw is the number of plane waves, M := Nbands the number of target bands, np := Npw /p the plane waves per process, mb := Nbands /b the bands per block, 

mp := Nbands /p the bands per process and mbp := mb/p the bands per process per block. For spectral filtering (left), we consider that we have 1 block. The main difference between the algorithms is that LOBPCG’s subspace iteration loop scales with b(k + 1) ,while Chebyshev filtering’s scales with k + 1 . Additionally, LOBPCG requires a Rayleigh-Ritz procedure within each sub-space iteration, incurring extra MPI communication. 

D. Floating-point operation count 

To quantify the computational cost of each algorithm, we estimate the floating-point operation (FLOP) count using the following theoretical models. We assume that k is the max-imal number of inner iterations (gradient descent or poly-nomial filtering degree) and b is the number of blocks in LOBPCG algorithm. Let Nprojs be the number of projectors involved in the overlap operator. Across p parallel processes, the parallel algorithms admit the following theoretical cost estimates. RR (n × m) approximately has a cost of O(m3)

FLOP (dense LAPACK solver for the problem on a subspace of dimension m) [24] and H(m×1) has O(m log m+mN projs )

due to FFT [23, 25]. Next, Sortho (n×m) is implemented us-ing calls of gemm (X⊤BX ), Cholesky factorization of a Her-mitian positive-definite matrix ( potrf routine) and the tri-angular matrix solver ( trsm routine), ultimately dominated by cubic scaling with respect to m. For Sinv , according to [23], the iterative algorithm used to invert S has a cost of 

O(N 2

> projs

) ≪ O(Npw Nprojs ).The Rayleigh-Ritz procedure and S-orthogonalization ex-hibit cubic scaling with the number of bands, while the Hamiltonian application and S-inversion of scale linearly with the number of bands. This theoretical estimate reveals that the final Rayleigh-Ritz step scales poorly in both meth-ods and is expected to represent a computational bottleneck 6for systems with a large number of bands. Thus, the number of bands emerges as a limiting dimension for these opera-tions.  

> E. MPI communications

This discussion is independent of the presence of a GPU and focuses only on comparing LOBPCG and Chebyshev fil-tering, all else being equal. We will examine the data trans-fers described in Figure 6 in order to obtain a comparative estimate of the communication costs. The MPI communica-tion cost, in terms of latency and bandwidth usage, can be estimated using the cost model α+nβ [26], where α is the la-tency (s), β is the inverse bandwidth and n the message count. To quantify this further, we theoretically estimate both the number of messages and communication volume for each al-gorithm. In LOBPCG, if n is the number of bands, m the number of plane waves, b the block size, and p the number of available MPI processes, then the all-to-all communica-tion from row-blocks to column-blocks involves p processes that send m/p columns and n/b rows, while the inverse op-eration sends m columns and n/pb rows. This operation is performed k times per block. With double-precision com-plex buffers, the message size is 16 nm/pb bytes. In Cheby-shev filtering, with no blocks, the message size is 16 nm/p 

bytes. The latency (proportional to the number of communi-cations) is k times higher in LOBPCG. In LOBPCG, communi-cation repeats k times per CG iteration per block, whereas in Chebyshev filtering it occurs only once. Therefore LOBPCG requires more MPI communications – in terms of message count – than Chebyshev filtering. Figure I summarizes the communication costs. This theoretical estimate shows that communications in LOBPCG scale linearly with the total number of blocks; thus, we expect LOBPCG to suffer from communication overhead when dealing with large systems, greater block sizes, or a larger number of blocks. It is important to keep in mind that MPI communications are performed between GPUs if GPU-aware MPI is supported.      

> LOBPCG (n, m, b, k )ChebFi (n, m, k )
> Latency cost kbα kα
> Bandwidth cost 16 nm/pbβ 16 nm/pβ

TABLE I: Theoretical estimates of the communication costs (message count and volume) for the LOBPCG and Chebyshev filtering (abbreviated as ChebFi ) parallel algorithms, with p

parallel processes, n plane waves, m target bands, b LOBPCG blocks, and k inner subspace iterations.  

> F. Arithmetic intensity

The arithmetic intensity I is defined as the ratio of com-putational work W to memory traffic Q:

I = WQ .

Memory traffic represents the bytes loaded from or stored to GPU memory on a single MPI process. Typically applied to cache memory, here we extend the concept to GPU memory. Our goal is to design algorithms that maximize arithmetic intensity per MPI process. The parallel LOBPCG and Cheby-shev filtering algorithms handle MPI GPU-to-GPU commu-nications differently for a fixed number k of inner iterations during the subspace iteration step. Indeed, LOBPCG ap-plies the Hamiltonian k times per block (i.e., “ k × Comm.– 

H application–Comm.” per block), resulting in a total of 2k

all-to-all communication operations. In contrast, Chebyshev filtering only two global all-to-all communication operations in total (i.e., “Comm.– Hk application–Comm.”). Intuitively, Chebyshev filtering maximizes arithmetic intensity by apply-ing the Hamiltonian k times more per MPI data transposition than LOBPCG. An estimate of the arithmetic intensity for the subspace iteration (SI) step, assuming it is dominated by Hamiltonian application costs (neglecting overlap application and inver-sion), is: 

I(LOBPCG-SI ) = FLOP (H(Npw × mbp)) 

Q ,I(Chebyshev filtering-SI ) = k × FLOP (H(Npw × mp)) 

Q ,

where mp := Nbands /p , mbp = Nbands /bp , and Q is the byte count for storing a complex wave function on the GPU in double precision. Thus, Q = 16 Nbands Npw /p bytes of loaded memory is common to both Chebyshev filtering and LOBPCG. In practice, applying the Hamiltonian to fewer columns in LOBPCG versus Chebyshev filtering is unlikely to yield significant performance differences due to GPU batch-ing. Therefore, the prefactor k dominates, and our analysis shows that Chebyshev filtering achieves k times higher arith-metic intensity per MPI rank than LOBPCG.  

> IV. METHODS AND PROGRAMMING MODELS

This section presents specific strategies used for offloading computationally expensive parts of the code on GPUs. More details on how low-level GPU libraries communicate with the 

Abinit code are provided. Basically we use the following hierarchy of operations from a development view-point: 1. Directive-based programming . The way data transfers between host and device are executed, the way we in-terface with GPU libraries at a programming level. 72. Algorithms . Includes all procedures that allow to per-form computations and apply mathematical methods on complex data structures, such as the wave function. Combines tools from abstraction layer to make them work together. Described in detail in Section III. 3. Low-level ops . Interfaces strictly connected to ven-dor libraries. Wrappers to libraries. Mathematical op-erations (matrix-matrix multiplications, FFTs, eigen-solvers) are mapped to GPU libraries. 4. Abstraction layer . Implements data-structures adapted to the commonly used objects in Abinit , namely the wave-function. The architecture is defined using a key-word and for every architecture there is a wrapper to its implementation. Boolean options are used to con-trol if an operation is executed on GPU or CPU.  

> A. OpenMP offloading

We employ the OpenMP offloading programming model for GPU acceleration, using OpenMP API version 5.0 [27] or newer. OpenMP handles device workload distribu-tion, memory management and host-device data transfers via target directives, with execution controlled by the 

OMP_TARGET_OFFLOAD environment variable. Computations are performed on the device within an OpenMP target region. We selected this programming model for (i) its directive-based simplicity, which facilitates porting with minimal code rewriting; (ii) its excellent porta-bility across platforms; (iii) its limited compilation depen-dencies; and (iv) its simplified memory management, which allows allocations and frees to be handled directly in For-tran. Together, these aspects enhance the code’s readabil-ity and maintainability over time. We systematically apply the COLLAPSE directive for batch loop processing, enabling straightforward GPU persistent memory management. The model also benefits from broad compiler support; we vali-dated OpenMP target + HIP on NVIDIA (A100, H100, H200) and AMD (MI250, MI300) GPUs.  

> B. Low-level operations

This section summarizes the GPU implementation of ele-mentary low-level operations. Our current approach primar-ily employs vendor libraries for maximum portability, avoid-ing custom GPU kernels. We mainly rely on backend libraries from CUDA Toolkit [28] for NVIDIA GPUs, and ROCm [29] for AMD GPUs, whose usage is detailed further in this sec-tion. Calls to these vendor library functions are encapsulated in wrappers, making them transparent to the overlying soft-ware layer. Firstly, batching is employed to compute the FFT of mul-tiple wave functions stored in an array through a single call, instead of applying the FFT iteratively to individual vectors. The plane-wave cut-off energy Ecut determines the grid size and, consequently, the batch size. This process is used when computing the local part of the Hamiltonian operator. Since this operation involves all plane waves, the data must first be rearranged into the specific layout described in section II C. The vendor libraries cuFFT [18] and rocFFT [30] are then used in a batched and optimized mode to maximize reuse of precomputed data whenever possible. Secondly, we specifically address matrix-matrix multipli-cations (i.e. gemm operations) and associated routines criti-cal for GPU-accelerated Hamiltonian. This requires replac-ing Fortran BLAS gemm calls with equivalents from cuBLAS [31] and rocBLAS [32]. Notably, the matrix-free plane-wave Hamiltonian application leverages level-3 BLAS operations, as applications to different bands are independent—favoring matrix-matrix over matrix-vector multiplications. Thirdly, for solvers, we employ cuSOLVER [33] and roc-SOLVER [34] to tackle the generalized eigenvalue prob-lem within the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure, complemented by the ELPA library [35] for direct eigensolvers of Hermitian matrices. This computational step proves critical, as the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure represents a major bottleneck (see Section III D). Consequently, the performance of the LAPACK routine hegvd —which varies significantly across implemen-tations—plays a pivotal role. Finally, an explicit code refactoring enables batched kernel calls on GPUs for applying the non-local operator, expressed as VNL = P 

> R,i,j

|pRi ⟩ DRij ⟨pRj |, where the |pRi ⟩ are projectors depending on atom R and local basis index 1 ≤ i ≤ nRlmn . Ul-timately, application requires matrix-matrix multiplications involving P = ⟨g|pRi ⟩ (projectors in the plane-wave basis), 

Cproj = ⟨pRi |Ψ⟩ (projected wave functions), and DRij . Since the local basis size nRlmn varies by atom type, batching these matrix-matrix multiplications requires subtleties. This was addressed by refactoring the code: loops were reordered to process atomic types sequentially first, while grouping wave functions into batches. The gemmBatchedStrided ker-nel, available in cuBLAS and rocBLAS, efficiently computes groups of matrix-matrix products on the GPU. Refactoring additionally involved transforming some function calls that previously passed Fortran array slices. Avoiding slices im-proves control over memory layout and exposes greater data parallelism.  

> C. Abstraction layer

An abstraction layer enables algorithms to interface with low-level operations from a software development perspec-tive, as illustrated in Figure 7. This abstraction layer provides Fortran types offering a unified, high-level interface for handling distributed matri-ces and vectors, performing algebraic operations, and solv-ing generalized eigenvalue problems. These types operate on blocks of row (or column) vectors forming contiguous mem-ory batches, with a data structure compatible with GPU ar-chitectures and support for CPU/GPU memory pointers. De-signed for clarity and simplicity—especially for Abinit devel-opers—the interface hides the underlying complexity and di-versity of algebraic structures used in wave-function manip-8ulations across linear algebra libraries. The abstraction layer facilitates easy extension by users through additional func-tionalities. The Tools framework supports matrix-free Hamil-tonian applications by manipulating objects X (the wave function) and AX (its application under operator A), with-out needing explicit knowledge of the matrix A. The module manages all memory allocations/deallocations of workspaces needed in diagonalization algorithms. The abstraction layer also provides an interface between wave functions and MPI routines. It enables efficient, trans-parent conversions between different wave function repre-sentations and their MPI distributions (see Section II C), while managing contiguous memory layouts. All required commu-nications are handled transparently—hidden from developers via simple routine options—supporting both row and column distributions. Sub-distributions via sub-communicators are straightforward to implement, facilitating additional paral-lelism across matrix blocks when needed. The abstraction layer enables efficient application of the non-local operator while seamlessly interfacing with BLAS and LAPACK implementations for dense complex-valued matrices. Ψ wave function 

> Math Tools
> Non-local operator
> xGEMM
> Transposition
> MPI
> Linear algebra
> xSolver xBLAS
> FFT
> xFFT
> Abstraction layer

FIG. 7: Hierarchy from the high-level wave function to the low-level GPU libraries (x=“cu”, “roc”) linked through the 

Abinit abstraction layer. In the current version, the abstraction layer excludes FFTs, which will be added in the upcoming version.  

> V. PERFORMANCE

In this section, we present performance benchmarks and numerical results for the Abinit GPU port, focusing on ac-celeration and energy efficiency across NVIDIA and AMD GPUs. We also discuss GPU memory usage, kernel arithmetic intensity, custom metrics, and roofline models, with particu-lar emphasis on comparing LOBPCG and Chebyshev filtering algorithms in inner subspace iterations their relative perfor-mance. Computer specifications are detailed in Appendix A. Systems from Table III are abbreviated as Adastra (CINES), 

Jean Zay (IDRIS), and Topaze (CCRT).  

> A. Test cases

We used two distinct test cases. Converged-SCF bench-marks (SectionV B) were obtained from converged calcula-tions of a solid-liquid titanium interface with 255 atoms, 4096 electronic bands, PAW pseudopotentials, a cutoff energy of 20 Ha, and 1 k-point. The number of self-consistent iterations was fixed. These tests ran on Jean Zay (IDRIS) and Adastra 

(CINES) using Abinit version 10.2.7 compiled with nvhpc 

compiler on NVIDIA and cray compiler on AMD. 

Single-step benchmarks (Sections V C and V D) used a sec-ond test case with constant-Hamiltonian calculations (single SCF iteration): Ga 2O3 with 320 atoms and 1536 electronic bands, PAW pseudopotentials, a cutoff energy of 20 Ha, and 1 k-point. Extra empty states were included in some runs. These tests were performed on Topaze (CCRT) using Abinit 

version 10.4.5 compiled with nvhpc on NVIDIA GPUs, along with Nsight Compute 2025.3 [36] for detailed profiling.  

> B. Results on multiple GPU nodes

Using converged-SCF test case, we compare GPU-accelerated performance and energy consumption between 

n CPU-only nodes and n CPU+GPU nodes — a true “node-to-node” comparison — for n ranging from 1 to 4. Each CPU-only node is directly benchmarked against one hybrid CPU+GPU node in terms of execution time and energy consumption. Figure 8 illustrates GPU speedup for Chebyshev filtering. NVIDIA GPUs consistently deliver higher speedup factors than AMD GPUs. The Rayleigh-Ritz step dominates execu-tion time and exhibits lower acceleration than the filtering step, which becomes negligible with GPU acceleration. The Rayleigh-Ritz step proves particularly poorly suited to AMD GPUs. Closer inspection of per-step timings reveals that the Rayleigh-Ritz portion increases with node count. Over-all, filtering benefits substantially from acceleration, while Rayleigh-Ritz improves more modestly, particularly on AMD architecture, where the ROCm library exhibits poor perfor-mance. On NVIDIA speedup is excellent: 2 GPU nodes out-perform 8 CPU nodes, enabling substantial resource savings. Figure 8 also reveals insights into strong scaling. GPU scal-ing efficiency lags behind CPU performance as node count grows, consistent with Amdahl’s law . Notably, the Rayleigh-Ritz step shows no acceleration with additional GPU nodes. In practice, thanks to this limited scalability, fewer GPUs are needed compared to CPU-only scaling. To measure energy consumption, we used vendor-provided counters and tools, executed on the same hybrid nodes, by enabling/disabling GPU usage at the code level. Absolute energy values are therefore not comparable across vendors due to differing measurement methods. Figure 9 shows energy consumption on our multi-GPU test case. NVIDIA GPUs on Jean Zay achieve higher saving factors than AMD GPUs on Adastra , which is directly related to the speedup factors observed on Figure 8. Strong scaling re-veals further differences. Energy consumption on Jean Zay 9Wall time (seconds)        

> 1 node
> 128 CPU 4 GPU
> 2 nodes
> 256 CPU 8 GPU
> 4 nodes
> 512 CPU 16 GPU
> 8 nodes
> 1024 CPU 32 GPU
> N/A
> ×17
> ×16
> ×13
> Jean Zay (IDRIS)
> Filtering step Rayleigh-Ritz step Other
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Wall time (seconds)
> 1 node
> 128 CPU 4 GPU
> 2 nodes
> 256 CPU 8 GPU
> 4 nodes
> 512 CPU 16 GPU
> 8 nodes
> 1024 CPU 32 GPU
> ×5
> ×4
> ×3
> ×3
> Adastra (CINES)

FIG. 8: Execution time and GPU speedup for Chebyshev filtering on a 255-atom Ti system (4096 electronic bands) over 10 SCF iterations. “Filtering step” includes operations between MPI transpositions in Algorithm 7; “Rayleigh-Ritz” covers subspace diagonalization; “Other” encompasses remaining calculations including MPI communications. Performance comparison between Jean Zay (IDRIS) with NVIDIA GPUs and Adastra (CINES) with AMD GPUs. 0 2000 4000 6000 Energy (kJ)    

> 1 node
> 128 CPU 4 GPU
> 2 nodes
> 256 CPU 8 GPU
> 4 nodes
> 512 CPU 16 GPU
> 8 nodes
> 1024 CPU 32 GPU
> N/A
> ×11
> ×15
> ×15
> Jean Zay (IDRIS)
> Milan A100 4 GPU
> 02000 4000 6000 Energy (kJ)
> ×5
> ×3
> ×3
> ×3
> Adastra (CINES)
> Genoa MI250X 4 GPU

FIG. 9: Energy consumption and savings for Chebyshev filtering on a 255-atom Ti system (4096 electronic bands). Energy saving factors compare Jean Zay (IDRIS, NVIDIA GPUs) versus Adastra (CINES, AMD GPUs). Energy measurements are provided directly by the supercomputers and may differ between the two systems. Therefore, comparing only the energy saving factor is meaningful. remains nearly constant with additional GPU nodes, while 

Adastra ’s scales almost linearly. A detailed analysis reveals that the differences in energy gains are primarily due to the performance of the LAPACK hegvd routine. 

C. Performance analysis of GPU kernels 

For a deeper analysis of GPU kernels performance, we gathered key metrics including compute performance, arith-metic intensity, and data transfers. These tests used a single-CPU benchmark: one SCF iteration with a fixed Hamiltonian on a 320-atom Ga 2O3 cell (1536 electronic states). We compared the results against theoretical esti-mates from Section III, enabling us to classify code sections as compute-bound (already well-optimized), memory-bound ,or communication-bound . The analysis shows that GPUs can substantially accelerate compute-bound operations. The roofline model [37] is used to quantify the efficiency of a GPU kernels by measuring operations performed per byte of memory accessed. Here, we apply it to assess intra-GPU overheads. We calculate arithmetic intensity using the formulas in Section III F, with roofline bounds derived from the GPU vendor’s peak specifications, here NVIDIA A100 card [38]. Measurements from actual executions reveal both 

compute-bound and memory-bound operations. FLOPS were calculated by multiplying the number of in-structions by the average clock frequency (cycles per second) and the kernel execution time. We define arithmetic intensity as 10 

I = CUDA + Tensor DRAM 

where CUDA measures total double-precision operations (dadd + dmul + 2 ×FMA) on CUDA cores, Tensor mea-sures total matrix-multiply-accumulate (MMA) instructions on Tensor cores, and DRAM measures kernel memory reads and writes. All these metrics are available via Nsight Compute soft-ware; small kernels were omitted for readability. Results in Figure 10 were obtained on one node of NVIDIA A100 GPUs (4 MPI processes, 1 GPU each) and show the per-formance and arithmetic intensity for process 0, comparing LOBPCG and Chebyshev filtering algorithms. We distinguish several components of the Hamiltonian application and itera-tive diagonalization algorithm. The Hamiltonian application splits into a local part (using FFTs) and a non-local part (us-ing gemm operations). The iterative algorithm is dominated by the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure, which involves gemm opera-tions and diagonalization in the trial eigenvector subspace. The gemm kernels in both algorithms leverage Tensor cores and are compute-bound , confirming their suitability for GPU acceleration. In contrast, the Rayleigh-Ritz solver, implemented through hegvd linear algebra library calls, is 

memory-bound and communication-bound , operating below peak bandwidth. The filtering step reaches peak performance and is thus compute-bound , whereas several kernels fail to at-tain the memory roof due to data exceeding GPU capacity. To optimize overall performance, an algorithm should minimize both the frequency and scope of the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure. From the roofline model MPI communication benchmarks, the mathematical operations in iterative diagonalization al-gorithms fall into two categories [37]: 

• Compute-bound operations: matrix-free Hamiltonian application and spectral polynomial filtering. 

• Memory-bound and communication-bound operations: orthogonalization and Rayleigh-Ritz procedure. These scale poorly with the number of bands due to plane-wave distribution. The Rayleigh-Ritz procedure oper-ates on relatively small matrices, resulting in low arith-metic intensity.  

> D. Comparison of subspace iteration algorithms

In the previous section, we observed that increasing the number of GPU nodes, while keeping the default parame-ters of the diagonalization algorithm, is not an effective way to reduce the execution time. In the following, we examine how adjusting the accuracy of the iterative diagonalization algorithm, specifically by controlling the number of inner it-erations, can substantially decrease the runtime. This can be achieved by tuning the block size in the LOBPCG method or the polynomial degree in Chebyshev filtering. We show that, for the Chebyshev filtering algorithm, increasing the polyno-mial degree improves the accuracy of the eigenvectors with-out degrading overall performance. For the LOBPCG algorithm, the GPU speed-up at constant Hamiltonian application is defined as s = T CPU 

> nline

/T GPU 

> nline

,where T CPU  

> nline

(resp. T GPU 

> nline

) denotes the execution time on CPU (resp. GPU) for nline minimization lines—i.e., nline 

applications of the Hamiltonian operator per eigenvector. The same indicator applies to the Chebyshev filtering algo-rithm: s = T CPU 

> ndeg

/T GPU 

> ndeg

, where T CPU  

> ndeg

(resp. T GPU 

> ndeg

) is the ex-ecution time on CPU (resp. GPU) when using a Chebyshev polynomial of degree ndeg .In Figure 11, we examine the speedup of a single SCF itera-tion as accuracy increases, by comparing execution times on a single CPU or GPU node. Increasing the number of min-imization lines in the LOBPCG algorithm has only a mod-est effect on speedup, whereas raising the polynomial de-gree in the Chebyshev filtering algorithm significantly im-pacts performance. This indicates that Chebyshev filtering incurs a lower execution-time penalty when increasing ac-curacy, compared to LOBPCG. Consequently, Chebyshev fil-tering enables faster SCF convergence (fewer steps overall) at less performance cost, making it better suited to GPUs than LOBPCG. Table II shows that the accuracy gains from Chebyshev fil-tering also reduce the final number of self-consistent field (SCF) iterations required for convergence. In LOBPCG, the number of SCF iterations is already minimal even with few minimization lines, as the eigenvectors—particularly the last ones—are well converged. Thus, increasing the number of lines adds unnecessary computational workload without re-ducing SCF iterations further. In contrast, raising the poly-nomial degree in Chebyshev filtering substantially improves eigenvector convergence and thereby decreases the number of SCF iterations. Like LOBPCG, there is a minimal number of SCF iterations beyond which no further precision is gained, while computation time continues to rise with the polyno-mial degree. Chebyshev filtering thus offers an optimal poly-nomial degree that maximizes GPU acceleration, though this critical value likely depends strongly on the simulated mate-rial. One major limitation of the Chebyshev filtering algorithm on CPUs is that the accuracy gains from increasing the poly-nomial degree fail to offset the filtering overhead per inner iteration. This leads to an overall slowdown in the self-consistent field (SCF) cycle execution time, despite fewer it-erations. In contrast, on GPUs, Table II shows that raising the polynomial degree pays off due to highly accelerated Hamil-tonian applications. The inner iterations then outperform even the best-case LOBPCG scenario, without significant ac-curacy loss. Chebyshev filtering also provides finer control, offering more flexibility to balance accuracy and speed by gradually tuning the degree as needed.  

> VI. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES

In this paper, we demonstrate that the GPU port of the 

Abinit software package enables highly efficient plane-wave density functional theory calculations. The GPU port we present is available in Abinit v10.6 or later. Performance 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

> Arithmetic intensity (FLOP/byte)
> 0
> 5000
> 10000
> 15000
> 20000
> Performance (GFLOP/s)
> HBM2e 2 TB/s
> 19.5 TFLOP/s Tensor core
> 9.7 TFLOP/s CUDA core
> +loc -
> +nonloc -
> Rayleigh-Ritz ( gemm )
> Rayleigh-Ritz (diago)
> (-orthogonalization
> CG blockwise
> De ￿ation

(a) LOBPCG with 4 blocks. 2 4 6 8    

> Arithmetic intensity (FLOP/byte)
> 5000
> 10000
> 15000
> 20000
> Performance (GFLOP/s)
> HBM2e 2 TB/s
> 19.5 TFLOP/s Tensor core
> 9.7 TFLOP/s CUDA core
> Filtering +loc -
> Filtering +nonloc -
> Rayleigh-Ritz ( gemm )
> Rayleigh-Ritz (diago)
> Filtering ( 1-

(b) Chebyshev filtering. 

FIG. 10: Roofline model for (a) the LOBPCG algorithm and (b) the Chebyshev filtering algorithm, using one NVIDIA A100 GPU node (4 GPU devices) for a constant Hamiltonian application (1 SCF step). Key GPU kernels are plotted: (non-)local Hamiltonian–vector products ( V(non)loc X), inverse overlap matrix–vector products ( S−1X), and the Rayleigh-Ritz procedure split into gemm and diagonalization steps, plus the block-wise conjugate gradient step. The vertical blue dashed line separates the memory-bound region (left) from the compute-bound region (right). The two rooflines represent the peak performance limits of tensor cores (FMA, matrix-matrix multiplications) and CUDA cores, respectively. These benchmarks were performed on the Topaze (CCRT) supercomputer using NVIDIA A100 GPUs (see Appendix A). is excellent on NVIDIA GPUs from the Ampere and Hopper families, as well as on AMD MI-series GPUs, though it re-quires graphics accelerators with high double-precision com-puting capabilities. A simple porting effort alone does not en-sure high performance; algorithmic adaptations are essential to make diagonalization procedures more GPU-optimized. It-erative diagonalization algorithms must be revisited to pri-oritize compute-bound operations with high arithmetic in-tensity, such as applying the Hamiltonian operator to large batches of wave functions. In this regard, spectrum poly-nomial filtering algorithms, such as Chebyshev filtering, are the most suitable, as they build the eigenvector subspace through repeated Hamiltonian applications on extensive trial vector sets. In contrast, the LOBPCG algorithm, which relies on block-wise orthogonalization via parallel conjugate gradi-ents, remains more memory-bound. Memory-bound opera-tions like subspace orthogonalization also limit multi-GPU scaling. Theoretical cost models and Abinit benchmarks both confirm that matrix-matrix multiplications on large wave-function sets boost arithmetic intensity and should thus be favored. On the other hand, the Rayleigh-Ritz pro-cedure, involving orthogonalization, should be performed as rarely as possible, on the smallest eigenvector subspace. To reduce the impact of compute-bound subspace diag-onalization, a viable solution proposed in the literature is the Spectrum Slicing method [39, 40]. This approach en-ables fast eigensolutions for large batches of Hermitian ma-trices processed in parallel on GPUs, while substantially re-ducing the size of the Rayleigh-Ritz operation. This method would facilitates simulations of larger systems by distribut-ing wave functions across GPUs during Rayleigh-Ritz steps. It avoids a global Rayleigh-Ritz procedure across all bands, instead computing smaller independent eigenvalue slices. In such polynomial filter-based methods, the polynomial degree must be much higher than in standard Chebyshev filtering. As demonstrated in this paper, the numerous Hamiltonian applications involved likely have only limited overhead on GPUs. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This project was provided with computing HPC and stor-age resources by GENCI at CINES and IDRIS computing cen-ters thanks to the grant 2023-AD010914563 on the supercom-puters Jean Zay and Adastra . Part of the work was performed using HPC resources from CCRT (CEA, France) on the Topaze 

supercomputer. This project was partly supported by the Eu-ropean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-gram under the grant agreement N ° 951786 (NOMAD CoE). The authors are grateful to Clémentine Barat for insightful discussions regarding Chebyshev filtering algorithm. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Hohenberg, P. and Kohn, W., Phys. Rev. 136 (1964) B864. [2] Kohn, W. and Sham, L. J., Phys. Rev. 140 (1965) A1133. [3] Ruffino, F. F. et al., Procedia Comput. Sci. 240 (2024) 52–60. [4] Hacene, M. et al., Journal of Computational Chemistry 33 

(2012) 2581. [5] Stegailov, V. and Vecher, V., Efficiency Analysis of Intel, AMD and Nvidia 64-Bit Hardware for Memory-Bound Problems: A Case Study of Ab Initio Calculations with VASP, in Parallel 12 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 Execution Time per Iteration (s) 46810 12 Polynomial Degree,  nline 

> ×3.52
> ×5.91
> ×3.91
> ×7.35
> ×4.20
> ×8.52
> ×4.39
> ×9.60
> ×4.53
> ×11.00

LOBPCG CPU LOBPCG GPU ChebFi CPU ChebFi GPU 

FIG. 11: Execution times for a single SCF iteration on one CPU or GPU node, as a function of the number of minimization lines ( nline ) for LOBPCG or the polynomial degree ( ndeg ) for Chebyshev filtering (abbreviated as ChebFi). The numbers next to the histograms indicate the CPU/GPU speedup at constant Hamiltonian application, as defined in Section V D. These benchmarks were performed on the Topaze (CCRT) supercomputer using AMD Milan processors and NVIDIA A100 GPUs (see Appendix A). 

Processing and Applied Mathematics , edited by Wyrzykowski, R., Dongarra, J., Deelman, E., and Karczewski, K., pages 81–90, Cham, 2018, Springer International Publishing. [6] Nieves-Pérez, I., Muñoz, A., Almeida, F., and Blanco, V., J. Su-percomput. 80 (2024) 16679–16702. [7] Genovese, L., Videau, B., Deutsch, T., Tran, H., and Goedecker, S., Improvements of BigDFT code in modern HPC architec-tures, 2011, PRACE White Paper. [8] Mortensen, J. J. et al., The Journal of Chemical Physics 160 

(2024) 092503. [9] Das, S., Motamarri, P., Subramanian, V., Rogers, D. M., and Gavini, V., Computer Physics Communications 280 (2022) 108473. [10] Das, S. et al., Fast, scalable and accurate finite-element based ab initio calculations using mixed precision computing: 46 PFLOPS simulation of a metallic dislocation system, in Proceed-ings of the International Conference for High Performance Com-puting, Networking, Storage and Analysis , SC ’19, New York, NY, USA, 2019, Association for Computing Machinery. [11] Jing, X., Sharma, A., Pask, J. E., and Suryanarayana, P., The Journal of Chemical Physics 162 (2025) 184105. [12] Verstraete, M. J. et al., The Journal of Chemical Physics 163 

(2025) 164126. [13] Gavini, V. et al., Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 31 (2023) 063301. [14] Dongarra, J. et al., Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications 

21 (2014) 457. Algorithm Degree Wall Time # SCF Squared WF residual 

ndeg (s) iterations at iter. 1 ChebFi 4 295.8 28 3.0e-6 6 204.0 17 2.6e-6 8 198.8 15 1.5e-6 10 198.8 14 1.0e-6 12 204.7 14 8.0e-7 14 221.4 14 2.5e-7 Algorithm nline Wall Time # SCF Squared WF residual (s) iterations at iter. 1 LOBPCG 4 236.3 14 2.0e-7 6 285.6 3.5e-9 8 334.6 2.5e-10 10 384.4 2.5e-10 12 432.6 2.5e-10 

TABLE II: Execution times and number of SCF iterations in 

Abinit on a single GPU node, for ground-state determination of the energy, forces, and stress tensor in a 320-atom Ga 2O3 crystal (1536 electronic bands). Results are shown as a function of the number of minimization lines (nline ) for LOBPCG or the polynomial degree ( ndeg ) for Chebyshev filtering (abbreviated as ChebFi). All runs used the same stopping criterion based on the density residual, with LOBPCG employing a fixed number of 4 blocks. Last column shows the maximum value of the squared wave function residual |HΨnk − ϵnk SΨnk |2 at the end of the first SCF iteration These benchmarks were performed on the 

Topaze (CCRT) supercomputer using 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs (see Appendix A). 

[15] Carter Edwards, H., Trott, C. R., and Sunderland, D., Jour-nal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 74 (2014) 3202, Domain-Specific Languages and High-Level Frameworks for High-Performance Computing. [16] Torrent, M., Density-Functional Theory electronic structure cal-culations within the “Projector Augmented-Wave” approach , Ha-bilitation à diriger des recherches, Université Paris - Saclay, 2024. [17] Frigo, M. and Johnson, S. G., FFTW: An adaptive software ar-chitecture for the FFT, in Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP’98 (Cat. No. 98CH36181) , volume 3, pages 1381–1384, IEEE, 1998. [18] NVIDIA Corporation, cuFFT: the CUDA Fast Fourier Trans-form library, https://developer.nvidia.com/cufft , Ac-cessed: 2026-04-08. [19] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., hipFFT: an FFT marshalling library, https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/hipFFT ,Accessed: 2026-04-08. [20] Haidar, A., Dong, T. T., Tomov, S., Luszczek, P., and Dongarra, J., A Framework for Batched and GPU-Resident Factorization Algorithms Applied to Block Householder Transformations, in 

High Performance Computing , edited by Kunkel, J. M. and Lud-wig, T., pages 31–47, Cham, 2015, Springer International Pub-lishing. [21] Blöchl, P. E., 50 17953. 13 

[22] Bottin, F., Leroux, S., Knyazev, A., and Zérah, G., Computa-tional Materials Science 42 (2008) 329. [23] Levitt, A. and Torrent, M., Computer Physics Communications 

187 (2015) 98. [24] Demmel, J. W., Marques, O. A., Parlett, B. N., and Vömel, C., SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 30 (2008) 1508. [25] Cooley, J. W. and Tukey, J. W., Mathematics of Computation 

19 (1965) 297. [26] Thakur, R., Rabenseifner, R., and Gropp, W., The Interna-tional Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 

19 (2005) 49. [27] OpenMP Architecture Review Board, OpenMP Application Programming Interface, Version 5.0, Specification, 2018. [28] NVIDIA Corporation, CUDA Toolkit, https://developer. nvidia.com/cuda/toolkit , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [29] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., AMD ROCm Software for HPC, https://www.amd.com/en/products/software/ rocm/hpc.html , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [30] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., rocFFT: discrete FFT written in HIP, https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/rocFFT ,Accessed: 2026-04-08. [31] NVIDIA Corporation, cuBLAS: Basic Linear Algebra on NVIDIA GPUs, https://developer.nvidia.com/cublas ,Accessed: 2026-04-08. [32] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., rocBLAS: the ROCm Basic Lin-ear Algebra Subprograms library, https://rocm.docs.amd. com/projects/rocBLAS , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [33] NVIDIA Corporation, cuSOLVER: Direct Linear Solvers on NVIDIA GPUs, https://developer.nvidia.com/ cusolver , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [34] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., rocSOLVER: LAPACK routines on top of the AMD ROCm platform, https://rocm.docs. amd.com/projects/rocSOLVER , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [35] Marek, A. et al., Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 26 

(2014) 213201. [36] NVIDIA Corporation, Nsight Compute an interactive profiler for CUDA, https://developer.nvidia.com/ nsight-compute , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [37] Williams, S., Waterman, A., and Patterson, D., Commun. ACM 

52 (2009) 65–76. [38] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU Archi-tecture, https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/ a100 , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [39] Liou, K.-H., Yang, C., and Chelikowsky, J. R., Computer Physics Communications 254 (2020) 107330. [40] Schofield, G., Chelikowsky, J. R., and Saad, Y., Computer Physics Communications 183 (2012) 497. [41] CCRT, CCRT: Research and Technology Computing Cen-ter, https://www-hpc.cea.fr/en/CCRT.html , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [42] IDRIS, IDRIS High Performance Computing Center, https: //www.idris.fr/eng/ , Accessed: 2026-04-08. [43] CINES, CINES High Performance Computing Center, https: //www.cines.fr , Accessed: 2026-04-08. 

Appendix A: Machine specifications 

Technical specifications of the CPU/GPU hybrid partitions used for benchmarking are shown in Table III. 

Appendix B: Abinit GPU-enabled functionalities 

Table IV summarizes GPU-enabled functionalities in 

Abinit version 10.6. 14 

Supercomputer Topaze Jean Zay Adastra 

Center CCRT (France) [41] IDRIS (France) [42] CINES (France) [43] Model BullSequana XH2000 HPE SGI 8600 HPE Cray EX4000 # Nodes 75 364 356 Processors per node 2 AMD EPYC Milan 7763 2 Intel Xeon Platinum 8468 AMD EPYC Trento (3e gen.) CPU frequency 2,45 GHz 2,10 GHz 2,40 GHz GPUs per node 4 NVIDIA A100 SXM4 4 NVIDIA H100 SXM5 4 AMD MI250X GPU memory bandwidth 2 TB/s 3 TB/s 3.2 TB/s Memory per GPU 80 GB 80 GB 128 GB # Cores per node 128 96 64 RAM per node 512 GB 512 GB 256 GB Peak performance 4,3 PFlop/s 126 PFlop/s 74 PFlop/s Power consumption 1400 kW 921.48 kW Network model HDR InfiniBand NDR InfiniBand Slingshot-11 Network bandwidth 100 GB/s 400 GB/s 200 GB/s 

TABLE III: Technical specifications of the hybrid (CPU/GPU) partitions of the 3 supercomputers used in the present article. 

Topic Property or method Ground-state properties (DFT) Total energy Forces, stress tensor Hybrid functionals DFT+U LOBPCG algorithm Chebyshev filtering algorithm Response functions (DFPT) Response to perturbation of k-point Response to perturbation of electric field Atomic vibrations (phonons at q = 0 )Atomic vibrations (phonons at q̸ = 0 )Elastic tensor Metals Many-body theory (DMFT) Green function computation Hubbard-I solver CTQMC solver 

TABLE IV: Abinit functionalities ported to GPU as of version 10.6 grouped by physical property. All listed features are implemented in the following formalisms: norm-conserving pseudopotentials, projector-augmented-wave approach (PAW), collinear and non-collinear magnetism, spin-orbit coupling.