Title: A New Paradigm for Computational Chemistry

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01360v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:07:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# A New Paradigm for Computational Chemistry 

# Raphael T. Husistein a, 1 and Markus Reiher a, 2 

> a

Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 2, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland March 31, 2026 

Abstract 

Computational chemistry has become an indispensable tool for generating data and in-sights, pervading all branches of experimental chemistry. Its most central concept is the potential energy hypersurface, key to all chemistry and materials science, as it assigns an energy to a molecular structure, the necessary ingredient for reaction mechanism elucida-tion and reaction rate calculation. Density functional theory (DFT) has been the most important method in practice for obtaining such energies, which is mirrored in the use of high-performance computing hardware. In the last two decades, a new class of surrogate potential energy functions has been evolving with remarkable properties: quantum accu-racy combined with force-field speed. Until very recently, their application was hampered by the fact that they needed to be trained on truly large system-specific data sets, gener-ated before a computational chemistry study could be started (in sharp contrast to DFT, which, as a first-principles method, works out of the box, but at a far higher price of com-putational cost). Very recently, this roadblock has been overcome by so-called foundation machine learning interatomic potentials, which are poised to completely change the way we do computational chemistry, likely prompting us to abandon DFT as the prime method of choice for this purpose in less than a decade. 

> 1

ORCID: 0009-0005-2696-4574 

> 2

Corresponding author; e-mail: mreiher@ethz.ch; ORCID: 0000-0002-9508-1565 

1

> arXiv:2604.01360v1 [physics.chem-ph] 1 Apr 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Central to our understanding of chemical processes is the assignment of a poten-tial energy to a molecular structure, more specifically to a nuclear configuration, which leads to the concept of a potential energy surface that allows us to study reaction chemistry in terms of stable intermediates, reaction paths, transition state structures, and so forth. It is the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the so-called clamped-nuclei approximation, which allows us to calculate the electronic energy of such a fixed arrangement of atomic nuclei. There exists a plethora of quantum chem-ical methods to calculate this electronic energy, all characterized by some balance of accuracy and feasibility. These methods allow us to predict reaction energies and activation barriers routinely [ 1 , 2 ], alongside molecular structures and transition states on the basis of the first principles of quantum mechanics, an accomplishment that was recognized by a share of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to John Pople. In the 1990s, approximate density functional theory (DFT) took the lead for this pur-pose within computational chemistry owing to its convincing compromise of bearable computational cost and sufficient reliability, leading to the recognition of its impact on chemistry by the other share of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Walter Kohn. More than 90% of all quantum chemistry calculations are of DFT type [ 3 ]and about one third of all computer science applications on supercomputer systems [4 ]. Hence, the practical and economic importance as well as the ecological footprint of DFT can hardly be overestimated. The accuracy (and to some degree the efficiency) of DFT depends on the approxi-mate form chosen for the so-called exchange–correlation (xc) density functional, typ-ically denoted by one of the notorious capital-letter acronyms. Although an exact xc functional can be shown to exist, its analytical form is not known and would prob-ably also be too involved for efficient computational chemistry approaches. Hence, rather drastic and often heavily parametrized approximations are adopted in prac-tice, while attempts are made to fulfill the comparatively small number of known rigorous constraints. However, the approximate potentials, which are obtained from these approximate xc energy functionals as functional derivatives, differ significantly from reconstructed reference potentials [ 5 –7 ]. The fact that such xc functionals nev-ertheless produce useful results in chemical applications can be taken as an indication that there must be some sort of error compensation present. In fact, error compen-sation can be exposed if approximate exchange functionals are replaced by exact local exchange in Kohn–Sham DFT calculations, which then no longer compensates for deficiencies in the approximation to the correlation functional [ 8 ]. As a result, practical DFT calculations have a significant semi-empirical character. 2An important consequence is that they cannot be systematically improved. However, it would already be sufficient to know the system-focused error of some specific DFT calculation [ 9 ], but rigorous uncertainty quantification is not easy (see, for instance, Ref. [ 10 ]) and Bayesian approaches have their limits [ 11 , 12 ]. Usually, one acquires empirical knowledge about the reliability of DFT results over time, by which one can establish some ’gut feeling’ regarding the reliability of certain xc functionals in specific calculations. We emphasize this touch of an anthopogenic bias to prepare the ground for a higher acceptance of the paradigm shift brought about by machine-learning inference models. The last two decades have seen an intense development of what is now called machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) [ 13 , 14 ]. In their seminal paper from 2007, Behler and Parrinello [ 15 ] proposed high-dimensional neural network potentials that were applicable to large atomistic systems (by virtue of an architecture that scales linearly in the number of atoms), yielded accurate results on par with DFT (which was used as reference for their system-focused training), and obeyed the proper symmetries. The value of their approach became clear quickly, because these neural network potentials were able to deliver the accuracy of quantum chemical methods combined with the computational efficiency of classical force fields. However, they came with a huge burden regarding their parameterization. Thousands of quantum calculations were needed to parametrize such MLIPs, which created a huge barrier for general purpose applications — but this situation has changed in the past few years. Foundation models were developed which demonstrate remarkable extrapola-tion capabilities, so that initial pre-training is no longer mandatory [ 16 , 17 ]. Even chemical reactions can now be studied out of the box. The tremendous success of these approaches make them the natural enemy of the current canonical choice for computational chemistry applications, that is DFT. In this work, we provide a brief review of MLIPs for the approximation of potential energy surfaces. We discuss their strengths and current weaknesses in order to eventually paint a picture of future computational chemistry relying on foundation MLIPs as the entry point for calculations in molecules and materials. 

# 2 Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials 

We first review and discuss some basic theoretical foundations of the new powerful class of potential energy functions. Various names have been used in the literature that all refer to the same concept: machine learning potential (MLP), machine learn-ing force field (MLFF), and machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP). Since MLP could be mistaken for ”multi-layer perceptron,“ there has been a shift towards 3the term machine learning interatomic potential and the corresponding abbreviation ”MLIP.“ MLIPs can be developed using various machine learning algorithms, such as linear regression, Gaussian process regression, and neural networks. Recently, however, MLIPs based on neural networks have become predominant in the field, so we will focus on those. MLIPs must meet two requirements in order to describe atomic interactions effec-tively and accurately. First, they need to encode a molecule or atomistic assembly in a way that enables machine learning algorithms that rely on fixed-size inputs to work with systems of arbitrary size. Second, MLIPs must address the physical sym-metries inherent to the problem. Specifically, the predictions of the energy should remain invariant under translations and rotations of the entire atomistic system and when identical atoms are swapped. The first requirement is typically met by expressing the total energy as a sum of local (atomic) contributions, 

Etot =

> N

X

> i=1

Ei({rj | ∥ rj − ri∥ < r c}) , (1) where each atomic contribution Ei depends only on atoms within a cutoff radius rc

around atom i. Physically, this approach can be motivated by the “nearsightedness of electronic matter” [ 18 ]. However, this assumption of locality implies that long-range interactions are neglected. While semi-local DFT functionals similarly miss long-range correlations such as dispersion [ 19 ], purely local MLIPs also omit long-range electrostatics. For the second requirement, there is a wider array of techniques. For example, early work in the mid-1990s and early 2000s employed carefully chosen coordinate systems that respect the system’s symmetries [ 20 –22 ]. A shortcoming of this approach has been that it could not be easily applied to different systems. This limitation has been mitigated by the introduction of de-scriptors, which are representations of the local atomic environment that respect the necessary symmetries [ 15 ]. One prominent class of such descriptors is the so-called atom-centered symmetry functions (ACSF) [ 15 , 23 ]. Although many different types of descriptors exist, including ACSF-based descriptors [ 15 , 23 –26 ], the smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) [ 27 ], the spectral neighbor analysis potential (SNAP), moment tensor potentials [ 28 ], and the atomic cluster expansion (ACE) [29 ], they share the common goal of encoding the local atomic environment in a symmetry-respecting way. To make this concrete, consider the high-dimensional neural network potential (HDNNP) of Behler and Parrinello [ 15 ], in which each atomic energy Ei (Eq. (1)) is predicted by a separate neural network NN taking a descriptor vector Gi as input, 

Ei = NN( Gi; θ), Gi = G(1)  

> i

, G (2)  

> i

, . . . , (2) 4where NN( · ; θ) denotes a neural network with learnable parameters θ. A typical radial symmetry function that encodes the neighbor distribution around the atom i

is 

G(1)  

> i

= X 

> j̸=i

e−η(∥rij ∥− μ)2

fc(∥rij ∥), (3) where ∥rij ∥ is the distance between the atoms i and j, η and μ are hyperparameters controlling the width and center of the Gaussian, and fc is a smooth cutoff func-tion making sure that contributions vanish continuously at rc. To capture angular information, the radial functions are supplemented with angular functions: 

G(2)  

> i

= 2 1−ζ X 

> j,k ̸=i

(1 + λ cos( θijk )) ζ e−η(∥rij ∥2+∥rik ∥2+∥rjk ∥2

) fc(∥rij ∥)fc(∥rik ∥)fc(∥rjk ∥),

(4) where λ ∈ {− 1, 1}, η and ζ are hyperparameters that control the spatial and angular sensitivity of the function to the local atomic environment, and fc is again a smooth cutoff function. By construction, Gi is invariant under translation, rotation, and permutation of same-element atoms, so Eq. (2) satisfies all required symmetries. Instead of using manually designed descriptors, one may learn descriptions of the local environment from available training data. In this approach, the system is encoded as a graph, with atoms as nodes and edges connecting all nodes within a cutoff distance. This graph is then used as input for a graph neural network [ 30 ]. Each atom is initially assigned a feature vector, either derived from atomic properties or randomly initialized, that serves as a numerical representation of the atom within the system. During training, atoms connected by an edge exchange their feature vectors, a process usually called “message passing,” and then update their own features based on the received features [ 31 , 32 ] (see Figure 1 for an illustration of this process). Initially, graph-based models used features, such as distances and angles, that were invariant with respect to the symmetries of the systems [ 33 –35 ]. Since energy re-mains invariant under rotation, translation, and permutation of identical atoms, this approach does not present challenges for energy predictions. However, ten-sorial properties, such as forces, change orientation under rotation of the system, making predictions based on invariant features impossible. Although models that use invariant features avoid this issue by calculating the force experienced by an atom as the negative gradient of energy with respect to the atom’s position, they cannot directly predict other tensorial properties, such as dipole moments or the polarizability tensor. This limitation is addressed by equivariant models, which are models whose features transform in the same way as the input [ 36 , 37 ]. Many of today’s state-of-the-art equivariant models are constructed using features based on spherical tensors repre-51. System De fi nition    

> Molecule & Cutoff Radius
> Local Cutoff Environment
> HCH ₃
> CH ₃
> SNOC
> 2. Graph Initialization
> Local Graph & Distinct Initial Features
> SNOC
> 3. Message Passing
> Message Aggregation & Feature Update
> SNOC

Figure 1: Illustration of the message passing scheme applied to a molecule. (1) A local environment is defined for each atom using a cutoff radius. (2) The resulting graph is constructed, and each atom is assigned an initial feature vector. (3) Each atom passes its feature vector to its neighbors. An atom then uses its own feature vector and those gathered from its neighbors to update its representation. For clarity, only the update of the carbon atom is shown. sented by spherical harmonics [ 17 , 38 –43 ]. To maintain equivariance when aggre-gating tensorial features, the Clebsch-Gordan tensor product is used, but computing it, which is required during training and inference, is computationally expensive. An alternative line of work uses Cartesian tensors instead, which is conceptually simpler and computationally less demanding. However, most architectures are restricted to tensors of rank 1 [ 44 –46 ] or rank 2 [ 47 ], and extensions to higher-order tensors are an exception [ 48 –50 ]. Empirically, equivariant models have been found to improve data efficiency, which means that fewer training samples are required to achieve the same level of per-formance [ 38 ]. Although enforcing symmetries through the input features or the architecture remains the standard approach, there are alternatives. For example, penalty terms can be added to the training procedure, discouraging violations of symmetry during optimization and thus guiding the model to learn the necessary symmetries [ 51 ]. Another option is to use data augmentation, similar to what was done in AlphaFold 3, which also allows the model to learn symmetries from data [52 , 53 ]. 

# 3 The Breakthrough: Foundation MLIPs 

The term “foundation model” has its origins in the field of natural language pro-cessing, where large models such as BERT were trained on large amounts of text and then achieved state-of-the-art results on a wide variety of tasks, such as ques-tion answering and natural language inference (i.e., determining logical relationships 6between sentences, such as whether one statement entails or contradicts another), through fine-tuning [ 54 , 55 ]. This approach marked a paradigm shift: models are trained on large and diverse datasets and then fine-tuned for specific tasks. Scaling up both the model and the training data resulted in emergent capabilities for which the models were not explicitly trained [ 54 ], which greatly contribute to their success and their increasing popularity. In the realm of MLIPs, the initial focus was on training models for specific chemical systems, limited to certain elements and geometrical arrangements. However, with the advent of foundation MLIPs (sometimes also called universal MLIPs), there has been a shift toward applying large, general models that do not require extensive system-specific training. The first generation of foundation MLIPs demonstrated that general-purpose interatomic potentials are achievable in principle. The Ma-terials Graph Network (MEGNet) was trained on data from approximately 60 000 crystals in the Materials Project database, covering 89 elements of the periodic ta-ble [ 56 , 57 ]. It showed that a single model could deliver low prediction errors on a wide range of properties. Since then, a plethora of new foundation MLIPs trained on large datasets have been published, including M3GNet, MACE-MP-0, and eqV2, for example [ 16 , 35 , 58 ]. These models have then advanced in several ways: they have grown in parame-ter size, adopted newer architectures, and trained on larger datasets. While the original MEGNet model had approximately 161,000 trainable parameters, M3GNet had 228,000; MACE-MP-0 had 4.7 million; and eqV2-L had about 153.8 million. Similar trends can be observed in the sizes of the training sets used. These ad-vances have brought about a paradigm shift in the field, enabling stable molecular dynamics, high-throughput materials discovery, and property predictions across a vast chemical space, all without the need for retraining [ 35 ]. Furthermore, MACE-MP-0, trained primarily on the MPtrj dataset with a strong materials focus, showed encouraging out-of-distribution transferability, including qualitatively stable MD of liquid water [ 16 , 59 ]. Although these models deliver good results on many systems, the training data used ultimately place constraints on what they can be used for. For example, systematic underestimation of energies and forces was observed in M3GNET and MACE-MP-0, and since the models were largely trained on DFT data from bulk materials, they have difficulty predicting surface energies [ 60 , 61 ]. Another study found that predicting the adsorption energies of different N xHy species on Ni(111), Ru(0001), Ru(1010) and Ru(1015) requires additional fine-tuning for all tested models, includ-ing eqV2 [ 62 ]. Further progress in addressing the limitations imposed by the training data used 7came with the Universal Model for Atoms (UMA), a model trained on a dataset of half a billion structures [ 17 ]. Not only is this data set of previously unattained size, but it also spans a wide range of domain-specific areas, including materials, molecules, catalysis, molecular crystals, and metal-organic frameworks. For this purpose, the five datasets OMat24, OMol25, OC20, OMC25, and ODAC25 were combined, and a single model was trained on all of them [ 58 , 63 –67 ]. While train-ing is usually performed with data generated using a single exchange-correlation density functional as a DFT reference, here, training was performed on a combined dataset generated using different density functionals. Analysis showed that knowl-edge transfer occurred across the datasets, with a model trained on all datasets outperforming one trained exclusively on molecular crystal data [ 17 ]. While there are three UMA model variants, ranging from 150 million to 1.4 billion parameters, even the smallest variant was shown to achieve results generally comparable to, or better than, specialized models across a broad range of domains without any fine-tuning [ 17 ]. This has since been corroborated. For instance, the smallest UMA model variant was applied to transition-metal complexes without undergoing addi-tional training. The results showed that reliable conformer ranking is possible for most ligands in rigid systems but is less reliable for flexible or fluxional systems, where energy differences fall below a few kJ/mol and thus approach the accuracy of DFT itself [ 68 ]. This development constitutes a paradigm shift within the field of MLIPs, demon-strating that large, general models can be applied throughout many domains, much like foundation models in natural language processing. Several such models have now been released, each presenting different trade-offs in accuracy and speed [ 17 ,

42 , 43 , 53 , 58 , 59 , 69 –75 ]. Early applications demonstrate the versatility of these models. For example, MACE-MP has been shown, without system-specific retrain-ing, to accurately simulate the metastability of siliceous zeolites relative to α-quartz and the phase transition pressures of silica polymorphs under high pressure, with results aligning well with experimental values [ 76 ]. Similarly, a systematic compari-son of approximately 10,000 semiconductors indicates that MatterSim-v1 accurately predicts harmonic phonon properties, with errors smaller than the difference be-tween the exchange-correlation functionals PBE and PBEsol, suggesting that some foundation models have achieved DFT-level fidelity in vibrational properties [ 77 ]. 

# 3.1 Static Generalist Models vs. (Repeated) System-Focused Fine Tuning of Foundation MLIPs 

As discussed in the previous section, foundation models have arrived in chemistry, and they are here to stay and make a long-lasting impact. However, the question 8now arises as to how these models should be applied. Should they be used as static, generally applicable models, or should they be fine-tuned to specific systems? We structure the comparison along four decision axes that directly influence this choice: (1) accuracy relative to application tolerances, (2) maintenance risk due to catastrophic forgetting under iterative updates, (3) data and computing constraints, and (4) the need for reliable uncertainty estimates. 

3.1.1 Accuracy 

As mentioned earlier, foundation models often achieve an accuracy level that is equivalent to or better than that of system-specific models. However, ultimately, it is important to assess accuracy on a case-by-case basis against application toler-ances. For instance, the accuracy of predictions for diatomic molecules outside equi-librium bonding has been found to be inaccurate for some foundation models[ 78 ]. Although some models have addressed this issue by including diatomic data in the training set [ 53 , 79 ], this illustrates that accuracy must be assessed critically against application-specific needs and tolerances. However, if a static generalist model meets the target error thresholds in the relevant chemical areas, using a generalist model can considerably reduce the required effort. 

3.1.2 Catastrophic Forgetting 

If a generalist model cannot achieve the desired accuracy, an alternative is to fine-tune it to incorporate new knowledge. However, this increases the risk of “catas-trophic forgetting”, i.e., a deterioration in performance in areas previously mastered [80 ]. If the model is to remain generally applicable yet be expanded to include specific knowledge, catastrophic forgetting must be prevented while simultaneously keeping it flexible enough to incorporate new information. This tension is known as the stability-plasticity dilemma [ 81 ], addressed in the field of continual learning, for which many strategies have been proposed in the literature. These strategies can be categorized as (i) regularization-based, (ii) replay-based, and (iii) parameter isolation [ 82 ]. Regularization-based approaches add penalties or constraints to the loss function (the objective that is minimized during training) to prevent modification of important weights associated with learned knowledge [ 83 ,

84 ], or to constrain the model’s predictions on previously learned data [ 85 ]. Replay-based approaches periodically retrain on past training data to prevent forgetting [ 86 ,

87 ]. Parameter isolation approaches dedicate separate subsets of model parameters to each task, preventing interference between old and new knowledge [ 88 , 89 ]. 9Most continual learning strategies have been developed for traditional machine learn-ing tasks, such as image classification, and have only recently been applied to MLIPs [26 , 90 ]. The most straightforward approach, and the one most frequently encoun-tered in the MLIP literature, is to freeze large portions of the network and only adjust the weights in the final layers [ 91 –93 ]. Although this prevents catastrophic forgetting in the frozen layers, it significantly limits the ability to incorporate new knowledge. A more targeted alternative strategy, called low-rank adaptation (LoRA), has been developed for large language models [ 94 ]. Instead of adjusting the weights directly, they are frozen, and small, trainable, low-rank matrices are introduced. This en-ables structured, low-rank updates across all layers while preserving the pretrained weights. This approach provides a more flexible balance between stability and plas-ticity than layer freezing. Although applying LoRA directly to equivariant MLIPs would break their equivariance, recent work has extended the concept to work with equivariant MLIPs. [95 ]. However, the application of continual learning methods to foundation MLIPs is still in its early stages, and their ability to balance stability and plasticity in practice has yet to be systematically evaluated. 

3.1.3 Data and Compute Cost 

Static generalist models are ideal for large systems where generating training data would be computationally prohibitive. However, compared to system-specific mod-els, training time is traded for longer inference times as the larger model size results in slower prediction speeds. In applications such as molecular dynamics, where chemical diversity is limited and inference time is critical, knowledge distillation is a promising approach. The goal is to transfer knowledge from a teacher (a static generalist) to a student model with fewer parameters. In doing so, general applica-bility is traded for significantly faster inference while maintaining, or in some cases exceeding, the teacher’s accuracy within the target chemical domain [ 96 –98 ]. This points to an emerging paradigm for MLIP development, in which published foun-dation models are used to create smaller, system-specific MLIPs that enable fast sampling without the need for additional training data. 

3.1.4 Uncertainty Quantification 

Having an uncertainty estimate for predictions is important for many applications. For example, many active learning workflows use uncertainty to add new structures to the training data set [ 99 –103 ]. The most common approach is to use an ensemble of models, either trained on different data splits or with different initializations, and 10 use the empirical variance calculated from individual predictions [ 104 –106 ]. However, in practice, a single static generalist model is typically released, which makes ensembling not applicable in this context. Although there are other tech-niques, such as Monte Carlo dropout [ 107 , 108 ], mean-variance estimation [ 109 ], and loss trajectory analysis for uncertainty measures [ 110 ], these generally need to be integrated during model training. By contrast, system-oriented fine-tuning allows for the inclusion of additional (lightweight) prediction heads and the subsequent use of ensemble methods [ 111 , 112 ]. However, the quality of these uncertainties must be carefully evaluated. For example, it has been reported that uncertainties can be significantly underestimated [ 112 ]. When uncertainties must be estimated for a sin-gle static generalist without fine-tuning, several post-hoc approaches are available: For example, gradient information can be used to measure the sensitivity of predic-tions as an approximation of uncertainty [ 113 , 114 ]. Alternatively, distance-based methods flag structures as uncertain if they are far from the training data in the model’s learned feature space. These methods do not modify the model and only require a set of reference calculations for calibration [ 115 , 116 ]. While gradient-based methods only need to iterate once over the training data to precompute some quantities, not at inference time, distance-based methods always need access to the training data. However, even a single iteration through the training data can be computationally demanding if the data comprises millions of structures. Gradient-based uncertainty methods are the natural first choice for a static generalist model because they do not require model training or access to training data during inference. However, there must be sufficient computational power to iterate through the entire training dataset once. To validate the uncertainty estimates and assess the accuracy of the generalist model for the target system, a small set of reference calculations is nevertheless recommended. If the model’s predictions are not accurate enough, fine-tuning can be attempted using the reference calculations generated as training data. 

# 3.2 Performance of MLIPs 

Comparing the computational cost of ab initio methods and classical force fields with that of MLIPs is not as straightforward as one might think. First, these conceptually different approaches have different hardware requirements. For instance, most DFT computer programs run efficiently on central processing units (CPUs) only, whereas MLIPs perform best on graphical processing units (GPUs). Second, it is not clear which measure is most suitable for the comparison: Should the focus be on runtime or on the computing power measured, for instance, in floating-point operations per 11 second? What about power consumption, which can vary greatly between CPUs and GPUs? In addition, what degree of accuracy and system size should be compared? Since these methods have different time complexities, changes in system size can drastically alter the results. Given these difficulties and the fact that exact runtime differences depend on the specific application, our goal here is not to provide exact numbers. Instead, we intend to provide guiding estimates. To understand how MLIPs perform compared to classical force fields and DFT, we performed structure optimizations on 101 naphthalene structures from the MD17 dataset [ 117 ]. For optimizing structures with MLIPs, we used the Atomic Sim-ulation Environment (ASE) program with the BFGS optimizer [ 118 ]. For DFT optimizations, we used BFGS and the NWChem interface of ASE with the PBE0 exchange-correlation functional and the def2-SVP dataset [ 119 –121 ]. To allow for comparisons with classical force fields, we optimized the same structures using the universal force field (UFF) and the conjugate gradient algorithm in Open Babel [122 , 123 ]. The measured timings are shown in Table 1. The overall conclusion is that, while force fields can be more than 200 times faster than the MLIPs studied, DFT calcu-lations can be up to a factor of 1000 slower than MLIP calculations. When we compare the time required for a single optimization step with different MLIPs, significant differences in performance become apparent between the various models. For example, an optimization step using the CPU with eqV2-M takes more than ten times longer than with Nequix. However, this is to be expected, since Nequix has around 700 thousand parameters, while eqV2-M has 86 million. It is also evident that the models do not all benefit equally from using a GPU (right column in Table 1). On a GPU (compared to the CPU), GRACE-2L-OAM is more than five times faster, while Nequix is only about 20 % faster. However, on average, the MLIPs are more than three times faster on a GPU compared to the CPU (geometric mean of the speedup ratios: 3 .07 ×). It is important to note that the provided timings are not intended for direct com-parison between MLIPs, as they differ in parameter counts and accuracy levels. Moreover, the timing is affected by system size, leading to different relative timings in larger systems. Our main objective here is to provide a general idea of how MLIPs compare to force fields and DFT. Our comparison of MLIP timings with those of the UFF further supports the existing literature that indicates that classical force fields are 100 to 1 000 times faster [ 124 ]. Similar substantial time differences can be observed between DFT and MLIP results, with the MLIP being orders of magnitude faster. 12 Table 1: Comparison of runtimes in milliseconds of a single optimization step for naphthalene structures from the MD17 dataset on an Intel Core i7-14700K processor (middle column) and an NVIDIA RTX 2070 graphics card (right column). MLIPs (upper part) used the BFGS optimizer, while the UFF (second row from the bottom) used the conjugate gradient optimizer. Method 4 Cores GPU MACE-MH-1 [ 43 ] 63.79 20.14 GRACE-2L-OAM [ 74 ] 52.57 9.17 MatterSim v1 5M [ 69 ] 32.83 16.57 eqV2 M [ 58 ] 471.18 76.56 Orb-v3 [ 70 ] 48.74 10.05 SevenNet-MF-ompa [ 125 ] 134.96 69.24 UMA-S-1p2 [ 17 , 79 ] 118.07 30.63 Nequix [ 72 ] 43.55 35.95 PET-MAD-1.5-S [ 53 ] 28.78 11.63 UFF [ 122 ] 0.15 —PBE0 [ 120 ] 29301.416 —

# 4 Challenges pointing to Future Developments 

Despite their impressive performance, foundation models for atomistic simulations still face several unresolved challenges. These challenges include limitations in the description of systems, computational scalability, data quality, and reliability. Over-coming these challenges will be crucial to realizing the full potential of MLIPs in real-world applications. 

# 4.1 Physical Fidelity 

A significant issue is their dependency on a fixed cutoff radius, typically ranging from 5 to 18 angstroms. Although message passing enables models to use information beyond this cutoff, information diffusion is ultimately limited by the cutoff and the number of message passing steps. This restricts the inclusion of long-range electro-statics and dispersion interactions, which are crucial, however, in the simulation of large atomistic assemblies such as metal-organic frameworks and biomacromolecules [126 , 127 ]. Various studies have addressed this issue, for example, by augmenting MLIPs with analytical long-range dispersion terms [ 128 , 129 ], by predicting partial charges or Wannier centres and summing the resulting electrostatic interactions [ 34 , 130 , 131 ]13 or by building nonlocal descriptors that can target both [ 132 , 133 ]. An alternative to explicit charge prediction is the Latent Ewald Summation (LES) method, which in-stead infers latent charges purely from total energies and forces [ 134 ]. This removes the need for explicit charge labels in the training data, making LES compatible with the majority of published datasets. Other approaches use charge equilibration (Qeq) schemes [ 135 ], in which electronegativities and hardness are predicted from local geometry [ 136 –138 ] and then used to minimize a quadratic energy functional with respect to atomic charges subject to the constraint of a fixed total charge. This enables the model to capture long-range charge transfer and redistribution across the system, but increases the computational overhead. Although most foundation models currently available do not directly account for long-range effects, the recently published models MACE-POLAR-1 and AllScAIP already do so, using two contrasting strategies [ 75 , 139 ]. MACE-POLAR-1 uses a physics-driven approach that extends the MACE architecture by including explicit long-range interactions. Atomic multipoles are iteratively updated by the local electric field using a non-self-consistent field formalism. This is followed by global charge and spin equilibration, which is enforced via learnable Fukui functions [ 139 ,

140 ]. AllScAIP, on the other hand, relies on a data-driven strategy. It combines a local neighborhood attention step with a distance-based cutoff and an all-to-all node attention step with no cutoff. This enables the model to learn long-range interactions from data [ 75 ]. It is important to note that incorporating information beyond a local cutoff means the computational complexity of the model no longer scales strictly linearly with the number of atoms, ranging from O(N log N ) for Ewald-based methods up to O(N 2) for AllScAIP, at least as long as no other measures, such as fast multipole approaches, are being taken. Regarding future developments, the jury is still out on the best approach to incorporating long-range effects into foundation models. Should the known physical form of long-range interactions be encoded explicitly, or should sufficiently flexible architectures be used to learn the functional form of long-range interactions directly from data? The latter might have advantages, as it could capture such effects in a very general sense (not bound to, and therefore beyond, analytic dispersion expressions), but accurate reference data for training will be difficult to generate. Another limitation is the neglect of the total charge and spin multiplicity in many MLIPs [ 16 , 58 , 69 , 72 , 74 , 125 ]. While incorporating these parameters as additional input values is straightforward at the architectural level, as some models do [ 17 , 43 ,

70 ], spin multiplicity alone is insufficient for many magnetic phenomena. Simulating antiferromagnetism, for example, requires explicit information about local magnetic moments on individual atoms. Several works have addressed the construction of magnetic MLIPs that incorporate local spin degrees of freedom [ 141 –145 ], although 14 these are system-specific models rather than foundation models. A first step in this direction was taken with the CHGNet model [ 59 ], which predicts collinear magnetic moments. However, the magnetic moments are not input parameters in this model, and therefore, the model cannot distinguish between structures with the same geometry but different spin configurations. Although recent foundation models have advanced in incorporating total charge and spin as inputs, incorporating local magnetic moments for solid-state magnetic simulations and extrapolating these models to unseen spin configurations and charge states remains a challenge. 

# 4.2 Scalability and Efficiency 

MLIPs are usually trained using energy and forces. However, many applications, such as transition state (TS) searches, require Hessians. For models in which the force is predicted rather than calculated as a gradient of the energy, incorporating Hessian information during training has been shown to be crucial for successful TS searches [ 146 ]. Even for models in which the force is computed as the gradient of the energy, incorporating Hessian information improves the performance of TS searches [146 , 147 ]. Furthermore, incorporating Hessians into the training process has also been shown to improve vibrational frequency predictions [ 148 ]. However, calculating the Hessian of a large MLIP scales quadratically with respect to the number of atoms and requires significant amounts of memory. Hence, training large foundation models using Hessian data and efficiently obtaining Hessians during inference remain challenges to be solved in the future. Although comparisons of MLIPs are often limited to energy and force errors, it has been shown that models with small force errors can still fail in molecular dynamics simulations [ 149 ]. Therefore, benchmarks that more closely resemble actual appli-cations are essential. One notable benchmark that contributes to this effort is the MLIP Arena [ 150 ]. Looking ahead, it will be important to develop more advanced training paradigms that not only utilize energies and forces but also adapt models directly to specific tasks, such as molecular dynamics simulations. 

# 4.3 Data and Evaluation 

The accuracy of MLIPs depends on the training dataset. The current approach to building foundation models is to train them on increasingly large datasets that span a wide variety of chemical systems. However, this approach presents several challenges. First, training on ever-increasing amounts of data is computationally expensive. Without a clearer understanding of which data is important for training, 15 a lot of computing power could potentially be wasted. Second, as datasets grow, the likelihood that erroneous or noisy data are included could increase, which ultimately limits the ability of MLIPs to learn. For instance, a recent study revealed that several datasets contained structures with non-zero net forces, suggesting numerical noise in the DFT calculation and suboptimal DFT settings [ 151 ]. Therefore, future work must develop a strategy for constructing minimal datasets to reduce training time. At the same time, there needs to be a fully automated mechanism to ensure that the data are of sufficient quality. Current foundational models largely lack an integrated mechanism for quantify-ing uncertainty. Although there are numerous methods for measuring prediction uncertainty (see Section 3.1.4), most models are published without an integrated uncertainty estimation method. As a consequence, one must resort to post-hoc approaches, such as readout ensembling ([ 112 ]). PET-MAD is a notable excep-tion as a foundation model that has a directly integrated uncertainty estimation [53 ]. However, foundation models must be equipped with well-calibrated uncer-tainty estimates to be practical to use. At the same time, developing uncertainty quantification methods that are both mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient remains an important open challenge for the field [ 9 , 152 , 153 ]. To ensure that quantum chemical calculations are no longer necessary, broad, domain-specific studies are required to show in which areas MLIPs are reliable. Then, MLIPs can be used without resorting to expensive quantum mechanical methods, similar to how DFT is currently used without validating calculations with more accurate methods. 

# 5 Conclusion and Outlook 

We are midst in a process that will fundamentally change chemistry as a scientific endeavor [ 154 ]. Successes in machine learning require us to question how we do chemical research, what tools we use, and how and what we teach in chemistry [155 ]. The efficiency and surprises of machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches affected all branches of chemistry, also how we model chemical processes. While theoretical chemistry has been based on the modeling of the explicit dynamics of atomistic entities (electrons, atomic nuclei, atoms, united atoms, ...) deeply rooted in mechanical theories well-established in physics, we now see a shift toward implicit models with surprising extrapolation capabilities emerging from data-driven approaches in the field now known as digital chemistry. Thomas Kuhn’s concept of a (fundamental) ’paradigm shift’ — unfortunately too often used in an inflationary 16 manner — is actually seen here in action. For the construction of potential energy surfaces, routine physics based modeling will be replaced by implicit models that, in some impenetrable way, have inferred the physics from large data sets. Foundation MLIPs will become the starting point of computational chemistry campaigns, completely replacing DFT for this purpose. While their performance is already very impressive, future work along the lines of the open challenges discussed in this paper will further increase their reliability, accuracy, and general applicability. Accurate ab initio reference data will replace the DFT training data so that they can achieve (multi-reference) coupled cluster accuracy from the outset, beating DFT methods not only in terms of computational costs, but also in terms of accuracy. Moreover, specific fine-tuning will always be pos-sible thanks to rolling benchmarking calculations which can produce system-focused ab initio data in an automated way. Accordingly, accurate quantum chemical meth-ods (obtained by traditional or quantum computation) will be used for generating training and validation data in routine computational chemistry. While quantum chemical approaches have always come with the promise of rigor and systematic improvability (a desire, too often torpedoed by the curse of dimensional-ity in quantum mechanics), accurate error bars have remained unaccessible for some specific problem at hand in routine applications [ 9 ]. By contrast, machine learning approaches usually come with built-in uncertainty quantification, which, if reliable, allow for system-focused studies that no longer require a well-defined underlying model, but a reliable uncertainty measure. This allows for a mix and match of ma-chine learning interatomic potentials, which is important for their system-specific fine tuning. Instead of using acronyms for approximations (as in DFT), we will eventually only resort to error bars obtained from faithful uncertainty quantifica-tion procedures. When the next-generation foundation MLIPs with automated fine-tuning and un-certainty quantifcation becomes available in standard software for computational chemistry, they will be tested by the community and they will convince the com-munity because of their easy applicability, accuracy, and speed and because of the system sizes or number of systems that become computationally accessible. Akin the DFT revolution in computational chemistry, we are now at the brink of the MLIP revolution where MLIP applications will become the new canonical approach to modelling chemistry. If the software implementations of these advanced MLIPs become sufficiently user friendly and black box, one might not even note the shift from density functionals to MLIPs, except that the calculations are now more accu-rate and faster. Accordingly, we may expect a whole new jargon in computational chemistry. But 17 it will not only be the way we speak about computational chemistry simulations in routine applications that will change, we can even anticipate a whole new class of chemical concepts that will allow us to extract descriptive and predictive qualitative information out of MLIP calculations, very much like standard chemical reactivity concepts that were rooted in quantum chemistry (especially within conceptual DFT). MLIPs are also the data-driven solution to unite the fields of quantum chemistry and materials science (electronic structure) with polymer and (bio)molecular simula-tions (force-field based configurational screening): quantum accuracy of microstate energies will be so quickly accessible that enhanced sampling techniques can be ex-ploited to represent configurational flexibility properly, but with quantum accuracy, a key to understanding all sorts of complex and functional processes in the molecular sciences. 

# 6 Acknowledgment 

This work was created as part of NCCR Catalysis (grant number 180544), a National Centre of Competence in Research funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation. 

# References 

[1] Cramer, C. J. Essentials of Computational Chemistry: Theories and Models ;John Wiley & Sons, 2004. [2] Jensen, F. Introduction to Computational Chemistry ; John Wiley & Sons, 2007. [3] Q-Chem, Inc., Q-Chem 4.3 User’s Manual: Density Functional Theory. https: //manual.q-chem.com/4.3/sect-DFT.html , [Online; accessed 2026-03-31]. [4] Camps, D.; Rrapaj, E.; Klymko, K.; Kim, H.; Gott, K.; Darbha, S.; Balewski, J.; Austin, B.; Wright, N. J. Quantum Computing Technology Roadmaps and Capability Assessment for Scientific Computing–An analysis of use cases from the NERSC workload. arXiv:2509.09882 [quant-ph] 2025 ,[5] Jacob, C. R. Unambiguous optimization of effective potentials in finite basis sets. J. Chem. Phys. 2011 , 135 .[6] Boguslawski, K.; Jacob, C. R.; Reiher, M. Optimized unrestricted Kohn–Sham potentials from ab initio spin densities. J. Chem. Phys. 2013 , 138 .18 [7] Mori-S´ anchez, P.; Cohen, A. J. The derivative discontinuity of the exchange– correlation functional. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014 , 16 , 14378–14387. [8] G¨ orling, A. New KS Method for Molecules Based on an Exchange Charge Density Generating the Exact Local KS Exchange Potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

1999 , 83 , 5459. [9] Reiher, M. Molecule-Specific Uncertainty Quantification in Quantum Chemi-cal Studies. Isr. J. Chem. 2022 , 62 , e202100101. [10] Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Systematic Error Estimation for Chemical Reaction Energies. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2016 , 12 , 2762–2773. [11] Mardirossian, N.; Head-Gordon, M. Thirty years of density functional theory in computational chemistry: an overview and extensive assessment of 200 density functionals. Molecular physics 2017 , 115 , 2315–2372. [12] Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. The transferability limits of static benchmarks. 

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2022 , 24 , 14692–14698. [13] Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Sauceda, H. E.; Gastegger, M.; Poltavsky, I.; Schutt, K. T.; Tkatchenko, A.; Muller, K.-R. Machine Learning Force Fields. 

Chem. Rev. 2021 , 121 , 10142–10186. [14] Behler, J. Four generations of high-dimensional neural network potentials. 

Chem. Rev. 2021 , 121 , 10037–10072. [15] Behler, J.; Parrinello, M. Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007 , 98 , 146401. [16] Batatia, I. et al. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry. J. Chem. Phys. 2025 , 163 , 184110. [17] Wood, B. M. et al. UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2025 , 39 .[18] Prodan, E.; Kohn, W. Nearsightedness of electronic matter. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2005 , 102 , 11635–11638. [19] Grimme, S.; Hansen, A.; Brandenburg, J. G.; Bannwarth, C. Dispersion-Corrected Mean-Field Electronic Structure Methods. Chem. Rev. 2016 , 116 ,5105–5154. [20] Blank, T. B.; Brown, S. D.; Calhoun, A. W.; Doren, D. J. Neural network models of potential energy surfaces. J. Chem. Phys. 1995 , 103 , 4129–4137. 19 [21] Brown, D. F.; Gibbs, M. N.; Clary, D. C. Combining ab initio computations, neural networks, and diffusion Monte Carlo: An efficient method to treat weakly bound molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 1996 , 105 , 7597–7604. [22] Lorenz, S.; Groß, A.; Scheffler, M. Representing high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces for reactions at surfaces by neural networks. Chem. Phys. Lett. 

2004 , 395 , 210–215. [23] Behler, J. Atom-centered symmetry functions for constructing high-dimensional neural network potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2011 , 134 , 074106. [24] Smith, J. S.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. ANI-1: an extensible neural network potential with DFT accuracy at force field computational cost. Chem. Sci. 

2017 , 8, 3192–3203. [25] Gastegger, M.; Schwiedrzik, L.; Bittermann, M.; Berzsenyi, F.; Marquetand, P. wACSF—Weighted atom-centered symmetry functions as descriptors in ma-chine learning potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 , 241709. [26] Eckhoff, M.; Reiher, M. Lifelong Machine Learning Potentials. J. Chem. The-ory Comput. 2023 , 19 , 3509–3525. [27] Bart´ ok, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Cs´ anyi, G. On representing chemical environments. 

Phys. Rev. B 2013 , 87 , 184115. [28] Shapeev, A. V. Moment Tensor Potentials: A Class of Systematically Improv-able Interatomic Potentials. Multiscale Model. Simul. 2016 , 14 , 1153–1173. [29] Drautz, R. Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic potentials. Phys. Rev. B 2019 , 99 , 014104. [30] Scarselli, F.; Gori, M.; Tsoi, A. C.; Hagenbuchner, M.; Monfardini, G. The Graph Neural Network Model. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2008 ,

20 , 61–80. [31] Duvenaud, D. K.; Maclaurin, D.; Iparraguirre, J.; Bombarell, R.; Hirzel, T.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Adams, R. P. Convolutional Networks on Graphs for Learn-ing Molecular Fingerprints. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2015 , 28 .[32] Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S.; Riley, P. F.; Vinyals, O.; Dahl, G. E. Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry. 34 th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Sydney, Australia, 2017; pp 1263–1272. [33] Sch¨ utt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Kindermans, P.-J.; Tkatchenko, A.; M¨ uller, K.-R. SchNet – A deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 .20 [34] Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Ener-gies, Forces, Dipole Moments, and Partial Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2019 , 15 , 3678–3693. [35] Chen, C.; Ong, S. P. A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for the periodic table. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2022 , 2, 718–728. [36] Thomas, N.; Smidt, T.; Kearnes, S.; Yang, L.; Li, L.; Kohlhoff, K.; Riley, P. Tensor field networks: Rotation- and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3D point clouds. arXiv:1802.08219 [cs.LG] 2018 ,[37] Anderson, B.; Hy, T. S.; Kondor, R. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst 2019 , 32 .[38] Batzner, S.; Musaelian, A.; Sun, L.; Geiger, M.; Mailoa, J. P.; Kornbluth, M.; Molinari, N.; Smidt, T. E.; Kozinsky, B. E(3)-equivariant graph neural net-works for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nat. Commun. 

2022 , 13 , 2453. [39] Batatia, I.; Kovacs, D. P.; Simm, G.; Ortner, C.; Cs´ anyi, G. MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2022 , 35 , 11423–11436. [40] Musaelian, A.; Batzner, S.; Johansson, A.; Sun, L.; Owen, C. J.; Korn-bluth, M.; Kozinsky, B. Learning local equivariant representations for large-scale atomistic dynamics. Nat. Commun. 2023 , 14 , 579. [41] Liao, Y.-L.; Wood, B.; Das, A.; Smidt, T. EquiformerV2: Improved Equiv-ariant Transformer for Scaling to Higher-Degree Representations. 12 th Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Vienna, Austria, 2024. [42] Park, Y.; Kim, J.; Hwang, S.; Han, S. Scalable Parallel Algorithm for Graph Neural Network Interatomic Potentials in Molecular Dynamics Simulations. 

J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2024 , 20 , 4857–4868. [43] Batatia, I.; Lin, C.; Hart, J.; Kasoar, E.; Elena, A. M.; Norwood, S. W.; Wolf, T.; Cs´ anyi, G. Cross learning between electronic structure theories for unifying molecular, surface, and inorganic crystal foundation force fields. 

arXiv:2510.25380 [physics.chem-ph] 2025 ,[44] Sch¨ utt, K.; Unke, O.; Gastegger, M. Equivariant message passing for the pre-diction of tensorial properties and molecular spectra. 38 th International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML). Virtual event, 2021; pp 9377–9388. 21 [45] Satorras, V. G.; Hoogeboom, E.; Welling, M. E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks. 38 th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). 2021; pp 9323–9332. [46] Th¨ olke, P.; Fabritiis, G. D. Equivariant Transformers for Neural Network based Molecular Potentials. 10 th International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR). Virtual event, 2022. [47] Simeon, G.; De Fabritiis, G. TensorNet: Cartesian Tensor Representations for Efficient Learning of Molecular Potentials. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 

2023 , 36 , 37334–37353. [48] Zaverkin, V.; Alesiani, F.; Maruyama, T.; Errica, F.; Christiansen, H.; Takamoto, M.; Weber, N.; Niepert, M. Higher-Rank Irreducible Cartesian Ten-sors for Equivariant Message Passing. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2024 ,

37 , 124025–124068. [49] Wang, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Yang, Z.; Liang, Z.; Shi, J.; Wang, H.-T.; Xing, D.; Sun, J. E(n)-Equivariant cartesian tensor message passing inter-atomic potential. Nat. Commun. 2024 , 15 , 7607. [50] Cheng, B. Cartesian atomic cluster expansion for machine learning interatomic potentials. Npj Comput. Mater. 2024 , 10 , 157. [51] Elhag, A. A.; Raja, A.; Morehead, A.; Blau, S. M.; Morris, G. M.; Bron-stein, M. M. Learning Inter-Atomic Potentials without Explicit Equivariance. 

arXiv:2510.00027 [cs.LG] 2025 ,[52] Abramson, J. et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature 2024 , 630 , 493–500. [53] Mazitov, A.; Bigi, F.; Kellner, M.; Pegolo, P.; Tisi, D.; Fraux, G.; Pozd-nyakov, S.; Loche, P.; Ceriotti, M. PET-MAD as a lightweight universal inter-atomic potential for advanced materials modeling. Nat. Commun. 2025 , 16 ,10653. [54] Bommasani, R. et al. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. 

arxiv: 2108.07258 [cs.LG] 2021 ,[55] Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. 2024 Annual Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT). Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2019; pp 4171–4186. 22 [56] Jain, A.; Ong, S. P.; Hautier, G.; Chen, W.; Richards, W. D.; Dacek, S.; Cholia, S.; Gunter, D.; Skinner, D.; Ceder, G.; Persson, K. A. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 2013 , 1, 011002. [57] Chen, C.; Ye, W.; Zuo, Y.; Zheng, C.; Ong, S. P. Graph Networks as a Univer-sal Machine Learning Framework for Molecules and Crystals. Chem. Mater. 

2019 , 31 , 3564–3572. [58] Barroso-Luque, L.; Shuaibi, M.; Fu, X.; Wood, B. M.; Dzamba, M.; Gao, M.; Rizvi, A.; Zitnick, C. L.; Ulissi, Z. W. Open Materials 2024 (OMat24) In-organic Materials Dataset and Models. arXiv:2410.12771 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 

2024 ,[59] Deng, B.; Zhong, P.; Jun, K.; Riebesell, J.; Han, K.; Bartel, C. J.; Ceder, G. CHGNet as a pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed atomistic modelling. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2023 , 5, 1031–1041. [60] Deng, B.; Choi, Y.; Zhong, P.; Riebesell, J.; Anand, S.; Li, Z.; Jun, K.; Pers-son, K. A.; Ceder, G. Systematic softening in universal machine learning in-teratomic potentials. npj Comput. Mater. 2025 , 11 , 9. [61] Focassio, B.; M. Freitas, L. P.; Schleder, G. R. Performance Assessment of Universal Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials: Challenges and Directions for Materials’ Surfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2025 , 17 , 13111–13121. [62] Zills, F.; Agarwal, S.; Goncalves, T. J.; Gupta, S.; Fako, E.; Han, S.; Britta Mueller, I.; Holm, C.; De, S. MLIPX: machine-learned interatomic po-tential eXploration. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2025 , 37 , 385901. [63] Levine, D. S. et al. The Open Molecules 2025 (OMol25) Dataset, Evaluations, and Models. arXiv:2505.08762 [physics.chem-ph] 2025 ,[64] Chanussot, L. et al. Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges. ACS Catal. 2021 , 11 , 6059–6072. [65] Chanussot, L. et al. Correction to “The Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges”. ACS Catal. 2021 , 11 , 13062–13065. [66] Gharakhanyan, V. et al. Open Molecular Crystals 2025 (OMC25) Dataset and Models. arXiv:2508.02651 [physics.chem-ph] 2025 ,[67] Sriram, A.; Brabson, L. M.; Yu, X.; Choi, S.; Abdelmaqsoud, K.; Moubarak, E.; de Haan, P.; L¨ owe, S.; Brehmer, J.; Kitchin, J. R.; Welling, M.; Zitnick, C. L.; Ulissi, Z.; Medford, A. J.; Sholl, D. S. The Open DAC 2025 23 Dataset for Sorbent Discovery in Direct Air Capture. arXiv:2508.03162 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2025 ,[68] Kalikadien, A. V.; Pidko, E. A. Performance of Meta’s Universal Model for Atoms across the Conformational and Configurational Space of Diverse Transition-Metal Catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. A. 2026 ,[69] Yang, H. et al. MatterSim: A Deep Learning Atomistic Model Across El-ements, Temperatures and Pressures. arXiv:2405.04967 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 

2024 ,[70] Rhodes, B.; Vandenhaute, S.; ˇSimkus, V.; Gin, J.; Godwin, J.; Duignan, T.; Neumann, M. Orb-v3: atomistic simulation at scale. arXiv:2504.06231 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2025 ,[71] Fu, X.; Wood, B. M.; Barroso-Luque, L.; Levine, D. S.; Gao, M.; Dzamba, M.; Zitnick, C. L. Learning Smooth and Expressive Interatomic Potentials for Physical Property Prediction. 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Vancouver, Canada, 2025. [72] Koker, T.; Kotak, M.; Smidt, T. Training a Foundation Model for Materials on a Budget. arXiv:2508.16067 [physics.comp-ph] 2025 ,[73] Zhang, D.; Peng, A.; Cai, C.; Li, W.; Zhou, Y.; Zeng, J.; Guo, M.; Zhang, C.; Li, B.; Jiang, H.; Zhu, T.; Jia, W.; Zhang, L.; Wang, H. A graph neural network for the era of large atomistic models. arXiv:2506.01686 [physics.comp-ph] 2025 ,[74] Lysogorskiy, Y.; Bochkarev, A.; Drautz, R. Graph atomic cluster expansion for foundational machine learning interatomic potentials. npj Comput. Mater. 

2026 , 12 , 114. [75] Qu, E.; Wood, B. M.; Krishnapriyan, A. S.; Ulissi, Z. W. A recipe for scalable attention-based MLIPs: unlocking long-range accuracy with all-to-all node attention. arXiv:2603.06567 [cs.LG] 2026 ,[76] Nasir, J. A.; Guan, J.; Jee, W.; Woodley, S. M.; Sokol, A. A.; Catlow, C. R. A.; Elena, A.-M. Modelling silica using MACE-MP machine learnt interatomic potentials. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2025 , 27 , 19784–19796. [77] Loew, A.; Sun, D.; Wang, H.-C.; Botti, S.; Marques, M. A. Universal machine learning interatomic potentials are ready for phonons. npj Comput. Mater. 

2025 , 11 , 178. [78] Lee, S.; Dieng, A. B. Are neural scaling laws leading quantum chemistry astray? arXiv:2509.26397 [physics.chem-ph] 2025 ,24 [79] Wood, B. M. et al. UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms. 

arXiv:2506.23971v2 [cs.LG] 2026 ,[80] McCloskey, M.; Cohen, N. J. Psychology of learning and motivation ; Elsevier, 1989; Vol. 24; pp 109–165. [81] Grossberg, S. How does a brain build a cognitive code? Psychol. Rev. 1980 ,

87 , 1. [82] De Lange, M.; Aljundi, R.; Masana, M.; Parisot, S.; Jia, X.; Leonardis, A.; Slabaugh, G.; Tuytelaars, T. A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification tasks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2021 , 44 ,3366–3385. [83] Kirkpatrick, J.; Pascanu, R.; Rabinowitz, N.; Veness, J.; Desjardins, G.; Rusu, A. A.; Milan, K.; Quan, J.; Ramalho, T.; Grabska-Barwinska, A.; Has-sabis, D.; Clopath, C.; Kumaran, D.; Hadsell, R. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2017 , 114 , 3521– 3526. [84] Zenke, F.; Poole, B.; Ganguli, S. Continual Learning Through Synaptic Intel-ligence. 34 th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Sydney, Australia, 2017; pp 3987–3995. [85] Li, Z.; Hoiem, D. Learning without Forgetting. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2017 , 40 , 2935–2947. [86] Rolnick, D.; Ahuja, A.; Schwarz, J.; Lillicrap, T.; Wayne, G. Experience Re-play for Continual Learning. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2019. [87] Shin, H.; Lee, J. K.; Kim, J.; Kim, J. Continual Learning with Deep Generative Replay. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017 , 30 .[88] Rusu, A. A.; Rabinowitz, N. C.; Desjardins, G.; Soyer, H.; Kirkpatrick, J.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Pascanu, R.; Hadsell, R. Progressive Neural Networks. 

arXiv:1606.04671 [cs.LG] 2016 ,[89] Yoon, J.; Yang, E.; Lee, J.; Hwang, S. J. Lifelong Learning with Dynamically Expandable Networks. 6 th International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR). Vancouver, Canada, 2018. [90] Kim, J.; Lee, J.; Oh, S.; Park, Y.; Hwang, S.; Han, S.; Kang, S.; Kang, Y. An efficient forgetting-aware fine-tuning framework for pretrained universal machine-learning interatomic potentials. npj Comput. Mater. 2025 ,25 [91] Deng, B.; Choi, Y.; Zhong, P.; Riebesell, J.; Anand, S.; Li, Z.; Jun, K.; Persson, K. A.; Ceder, G. Overcoming systematic softening in universal ma-chine learning interatomic potentials by fine-tuning. arXiv:2405.07105 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2024 ,[92] Radova, M.; Stark, W. G.; Allen, C. S.; Maurer, R. J.; Bart´ ok, A. P. Fine-tuning foundation models of materials interatomic potentials with frozen transfer learning. npj Computational Materials 2025 , 11 , 237. [93] Bensberg, M.; Eckhoff, M.; Husistein, R. T.; Teynor, M. S.; Sora, V.; Bro-Jørgensen, W.; Thomasen, F. E.; Krogh, A.; Lindorff-Larsen, K.; Solomon, G. C.; Weymuth, T.; Reiher, M. Hierarchical Quantum Embed-ding by Machine Learning for Large Molecular Assemblies. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025 , 21 , 7662–7674. [94] Hu, E. J.; Shen, Y.; Wallis, P.; Allen-Zhu, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, S.; Wang, L.; Chen, W. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. 10 th In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Virtual event, 2022. [95] Wang, C.; Hu, S.; Tan, G.; Jia, W. ELoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation for Equiv-ariant GNNs. 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Vancouver, Canada, 2025; pp 63113–63135. [96] Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; Dean, J. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Net-work. arXiv:1503.02531 [stat.ML] 2015 ,[97] Ekstr¨ om Kelvinius, F.; Georgiev, D.; Toshev, A.; Gasteiger, J. Accelerating Molecular Graph Neural Networks via Knowledge Distillation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. 2023 , 36 , 25761–25792. [98] Amin, I.; Raja, S.; Krishnapriyan, A. S. Towards Fast, Specialized Machine Learning Force Fields: Distilling Foundation Models via Energy Hessians. 13 th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Singapore, Singapore, 2025. [99] Reker, D.; Schneider, G. Active-learning strategies in computer-assisted drug discovery. Drug Discov. Today 2015 , 20 , 458–465. [100] Gastegger, M.; Behler, J.; Marquetand, P. Machine learning molecular dynam-ics for the simulation of infrared spectra. Chem. Sci. 2017 , 8, 6924–6935. [101] Podryabinkin, E. V.; Shapeev, A. V. Active learning of linearly parametrized interatomic potentials. Comput. Mater. Sci. 2017 , 140 , 171–180. 26 [102] Smith, J. S.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Less is more: Sampling chemical space with active learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 .[103] Bensberg, M.; Eckhoff, M.; Thomasen, F. E.; Bro-Jørgensen, W.; Teynor, M. S.; Sora, V.; Weymuth, T.; Husistein, R. T.; Knudsen, F. E.; Krogh, K., Andersand Lindorff-Larsen; Reiher, M.; Solomon, G. C. Machine Learning-Enhanced Calculation of Quantum-Classical Binding Free Energies. 

J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025 , 21 , 8182–8198. [104] Behler, J. Representing potential energy surfaces by high-dimensional neural network potentials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2014 , 26 , 183001. [105] Lakshminarayanan, B.; Pritzel, A.; Blundell, C. Simple and Scalable Predic-tive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst 2017 , 30 .[106] Peterson, A. A.; Christensen, R.; Khorshidi, A. Addressing uncertainty in atomistic machine learning. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017 , 19 , 10978–10985. [107] Gal, Y.; Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Represent-ing Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning. 33 rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). New York, New York, USA, 2016; pp 1050–1059. [108] Wen, M.; Tadmor, E. B. Uncertainty quantification in molecular simulations with dropout neural network potentials. Npj Comput. Mater. 2020 , 6, 124. [109] Nix, D. A.; Weigend, A. S. Estimating the mean and variance of the target probability distribution. Proceedings of 1994 ieee international conference on neural networks (ICNN’94). 1994; pp 55–60. [110] Vita, J. A.; Samanta, A.; Zhou, F.; Lordi, V. LTAU-FF: Loss Trajectory Analysis for Uncertainty in atomistic Force Fields. Mach. learn.: sci. technol. 

2025 , 6, 015048. [111] Kellner, M.; Ceriotti, M. Uncertainty quantification by direct propagation of shallow ensembles. Mach. learn.: sci. technol. 2024 , 5, 035006. [112] Bilbrey, J. A.; Firoz, J. S.; Lee, M.-S.; Choudhury, S. Uncertainty quantifi-cation for neural network potential foundation models. Npj Comput. Mater. 

2025 , 11 , 109. [113] Zaverkin, V.; K¨ astner, J. Exploration of transferable and uniformly accu-rate neural network interatomic potentials using optimal experimental design. 

Mach. learn.: sci. technol. 2021 , 2, 035009. 27 [114] Bigi, F.; Chong, S.; Ceriotti, M.; Grasselli, F. A prediction rigidity formal-ism for low-cost uncertainties in trained neural networks. Mach. learn.: sci. technol. 2024 , 5, 045018. [115] Janet, J. P.; Duan, C.; Yang, T.; Nandy, A.; Kulik, H. J. A quantitative uncertainty metric controls error in neural network-driven chemical discovery. 

Chem. Sci. 2019 , 10 , 7913–7922. [116] Hu, Y.; Musielewicz, J.; Ulissi, Z. W.; Medford, A. J. Robust and scalable uncertainty estimation with conformal prediction for machine-learned inter-atomic potentials. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2022 , 3, 045028. [117] Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A.; Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.; Sch¨ utt, K. T.; M¨ uller, K.-R. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields. Sci. Adv. 2017 , 3, e1603015. [118] Hjorth Larsen, A. et al. The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for working with atoms. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2017 , 29 , 273002. [119] Valiev, M.; Bylaska, E. J.; Govind, N.; Kowalski, K.; Straatsma, T. P.; Van Dam, H. J. J.; Wang, D.; Nieplocha, J.; Apr` a, E.; Windus, T. L., et al. NWChem: A comprehensive and scalable open-source solution for large scale molecular simulations. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2010 , 181 , 1477–1489. [120] Adamo, C.; Barone, V. Toward reliable density functional methods without adjustable parameters: The PBE0 model. J. Chem. Phys. 1999 , 110 , 6158– 6170. [121] Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R. Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple zeta va-lence and quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design and assessment of accuracy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2005 , 7, 3297–3305. [122] Rappe, A. K.; Casewit, C. J.; Colwell, K. S.; Goddard III, W. A.; Skiff, W. M. UFF, a full periodic table force field for molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics simulations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992 , 114 , 10024–10035. [123] O’Boyle, N. M.; Banck, M.; James, C. A.; Morley, C.; Vandermeersch, T.; Hutchison, G. R. Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox. J. Cheminform. 

2011 , 3, 33. [124] Wang, Y. et al. On the design space between molecular mechanics and machine learning force fields. Appl. Phys. Rev. 2025 , 12 , 021304. [125] Kim, J.; Kim, J.; Kim, J.; Lee, J.; Park, Y.; Kang, Y.; Han, S. Data-Efficient Multifidelity Training for High-Fidelity Machine Learning Interatomic Poten-tials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024 , 147 , 1042–1054. 28 [126] Formalik, F.; Fischer, M.; Rogacka, J.; Firlej, L.; Kuchta, B. Benchmarking of GGA density functionals for modeling structures of nanoporous, rigid and flexible MOFs. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 149 .[127] Zhou, H.-X.; Pang, X. Electrostatic Interactions in Protein Structure, Folding, Binding, and Condensation. Chem. Rev. 2018 , 118 , 1691–1741. [128] Wen, M.; Tadmor, E. B. Hybrid neural network potential for multilayer graphene. Phys. Rev. B 2019 , 100 , 195419. [129] Deringer, V. L.; Caro, M. A.; Cs´ anyi, G. A general-purpose machine-learning force field for bulk and nanostructured phosphorus. Nat. Commun. 2020 , 11 ,5461. [130] Artrith, N.; Morawietz, T.; Behler, J. High-dimensional neural-network po-tentials for multicomponent systems: Applications to zinc oxide. Phys. Rev. B 2011 , 83 , 153101. [131] Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; Muniz, M. C.; Panagiotopoulos, A. Z.; Car, R.; E, W. A deep potential model with long-range electrostatic interactions. J. Chem. Phys. 2022 , 156 .[132] Grisafi, A.; Ceriotti, M. Incorporating long-range physics in atomic-scale ma-chine learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2019 , 151 .[133] Huguenin-Dumittan, K. K.; Loche, P.; Haoran, N.; Ceriotti, M. Physics-Inspired Equivariant Descriptors of Nonbonded Interactions. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2023 , 14 , 9612–9618. [134] Cheng, B. Latent Ewald summation for machine learning of long-range inter-actions. npj Comput. Mater. 2025 , 11 , 80. [135] Rappe, A. K.; Goddard III, W. A. Charge equilibration for molecular dynamics simulations. J. Phys. Chem. 1991 , 95 , 3358–3363. [136] Ghasemi, S. A.; Hofstetter, A.; Saha, S.; Goedecker, S. Interatomic potentials for ionic systems with density functional accuracy based on charge densities obtained by a neural network. Phys. Rev. B 2015 , 92 , 045131. [137] Ko, T. W.; Finkler, J. A.; Goedecker, S.; Behler, J. A fourth-generation high-dimensional neural network potential with accurate electrostatics including non-local charge transfer. Nat. Commun. 2021 , 12 , 398. [138] Staacke, C. G.; Wengert, S.; Kunkel, C.; Cs´ anyi, G.; Reuter, K.; Margraf, J. T. Kernel charge equilibration: efficient and accurate prediction of molecular 29 dipole moments with a machine-learning enhanced electron density model. 

Machine Learning: Science and Technology 2022 , 3, 015032. [139] Batatia, I.; Baldwin, W. J.; Kuryla, D.; Hart, J.; Kasoar, E.; Elena, A. M.; Moore, H.; Gawkowski, M. J.; Shi, B. X.; Kapil, V.; Kourtis, P.; Magd˘ au, I.-B.; Cs´ anyi, G. MACE-POLAR-1: A Polarisable Electrostatic Foundation Model for Molecular Chemistry. arXiv:2602.19411 [physics.chem-ph] 2026 ,[140] Baldwin, W. J.; Batatia, I.; Vondr´ ak, M.; Margraf, J. T.; Cs´ anyi, G. Design Space of Self–Consistent Electrostatic Machine Learning Interatomic Poten-tials. arXiv:2603.14700 [physics.chem-ph] 2026 ,[141] Eckhoff, M.; Behler, J. High-dimensional neural network potentials for mag-netic systems using spin-dependent atom-centered symmetry functions. Npj Comput. Mater. 2021 , 7, 170. [142] Novikov, I.; Grabowski, B.; K¨ ormann, F.; Shapeev, A. Magnetic Moment Ten-sor Potentials for collinear spin-polarized materials reproduce different mag-netic states of bcc Fe. Npj Comput. Mater. 2022 , 8, 13. [143] Yu, H.; Xu, C.; Li, X.; Lou, F.; Bellaiche, L.; Hu, Z.; Gong, X.; Xiang, H. Complex spin Hamiltonian represented by an artificial neural network. Phys. Rev. B 2022 , 105 , 174422. [144] Yu, H.; Zhong, Y.; Hong, L.; Xu, C.; Ren, W.; Gong, X.; Xiang, H. Spin-dependent graph neural network potential for magnetic materials. Phys. Rev. B 2024 , 109 , 144426. [145] Xu, W.; Sanspeur, R. Y.; Kolluru, A.; Deng, B.; Harrington, P.; Farrell, S.; Reuter, K.; Kitchin, J. R. Spin-informed universal graph neural networks for simulating magnetic ordering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2025 , 122 ,e2422973122. [146] Cui, T.; Han, Y.; Jia, H.; Duan, C.; Zhao, Q. Horm: A large scale molecular hessian database for optimizing reactive machine learning interatomic poten-tials. arXiv:2505.12447 [physics.chem-ph] 2025 ,[147] Rodriguez, A.; Smith, J. S.; Mendoza-Cortes, J. L. Does Hessian Data Improve the Performance of Machine Learning Potentials? J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2025 ,[148] Williams, N. J.; Kabalan, L.; Stojanovic, L.; Z´ olyomi, V.; Pyzer-Knapp, E. O. Hessian QM9: A quantum chemistry database of molecular Hessians in im-plicit solvents. Sci. Data 2025 , 12 , 9. 30 [149] Fu, X.; Wu, Z.; Wang, W.; Xie, T.; Keten, S.; G´ omez-Bombarelli, R.; ommi S. Jaakkola, Forces are not Enough: Benchmark and Critical Evaluation for Machine Learning Force Fields with Molecular Simulations. 2023. [150] Chiang, Y.; Kreiman, T.; Weaver, E.; Kuner, M.; Zhang, C.; Kaplan, A.; Chrzan, D.; Blau, S. M.; Krishnapriyan, A. S.; Asta, M. MLIP Arena: Ad-vancing Fairness and Transparency in Machine Learning Interatomic Poten-tials through an Open and Accessible Benchmark Platform. 13 th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Singapore, Singapore, 2025. [151] Kuryla, D.; Berger, F.; Cs´ anyi, G.; Michaelides, A. How Accurate Are DFT Forces? Unexpectedly Large Uncertainties in Molecular Datasets. J. Chem. Phys. 2025 , 163 .[152] Simm, G. N.; Proppe, J.; Reiher, M. Error Assessment of Computational Models in Chemistry. CHIMIA 2017 , 71 , 202. [153] Grasselli, F.; Chong, S.; Kapil, V.; Bonfanti, S.; Rossi, K. Uncertainty in the era of machine learning for atomistic modeling. Digit. Discov. 2025 , 4,2654–2675. [154] Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Lindh, R.; Reiher, M. The Matter Simulation (R)evolution. 

ACS Cent. Sci. 2018 , 4, 144–152. [155] Vogiatzis, K. D. et al. Boosting Computational Catalysis and Chemical Reac-tivity with Artificial Intelligence. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2026 , 148 , 9143–9155. 31